# Aquifer Open Bible Dictionary

**Tyndale Open Bible Dictionary: Aquifer Edition**

This work is an adaptation of *Tyndale Open Bible Dictionary* © 2023 Tyndale House Publishers, licensed under the CC BY\-SA 4\.0 license. The adaptation, *Aquifer Open Bible Dictionary*, was created by BiblioNexus and is also licensed under CC BY\-SA 4\.0\.

This resource has been adapted into multiple languages, including English, Tok Pisin, Arabic (عربي), French (Français), Hindi (हिंदी), Indonesian (Bahasa Indonesia), Portuguese (Português), Russian (Русский), Spanish (Español), Swahili (Kiswahili), and Simplified Chinese (简体中文).



--------------------------------

## Acropolis (id: 3351)

ACROPOLIS
=========

A term combining the Greek *akros* (meaning “highest”) and *polis* (meaning “city”). In ancient Greece, an acropolis was a strong, protected place. It usually was built on a hill and served as a place of refuge. The area around the base of the hill would often develop into a city.

The acropolis in Athens (the capital city of Greece) had a famous building called the Parthenon. The Parthenon was a temple built to honor Athena, who ancient Greeks believed was the goddess of wisdom. People made this temple in the 500s BC (over 2,500 years ago). The Parthenon was built in a style called Doric (a type of Greek building design). Many people think it is one of the best examples of Greek building skills from long ago.

[Acts 17:34](https://ref.ly/Acts17:34) mentions that Paul preached at the Areopagus, meaning “hill of Ares,” which is a low hill northwest of the acropolis. When Paul spoke there, he helped one person from the Athens city council become a follower of Jesus.

* **Associated Passages:** ACT 17:34

