# Aquifer Open Bible Dictionary

**Tyndale Open Bible Dictionary: Aquifer Edition**

This work is an adaptation of *Tyndale Open Bible Dictionary* © 2023 Tyndale House Publishers, licensed under the CC BY\-SA 4\.0 license. The adaptation, *Aquifer Open Bible Dictionary*, was created by BiblioNexus and is also licensed under CC BY\-SA 4\.0\.

This resource has been adapted into multiple languages, including English, Tok Pisin, Arabic (عربي), French (Français), Hindi (हिंदी), Indonesian (Bahasa Indonesia), Portuguese (Português), Russian (Русский), Spanish (Español), Swahili (Kiswahili), and Simplified Chinese (简体中文).



--------------------------------

## Adrammelech (id: 3398)

ADRAMMELECH
===========

1. The son of the Assyrian king, Sennacherib. Adrammelech and his brother Sharezer killed their father in the temple of Nisroch in Nineveh ([2 Kings 19:37](https://ref.ly/2Kgs19:37); [Isaiah 37:38](https://ref.ly/Isa37:38)). The nonbiblical text *Babylonian Chronicles* also talks about this assassination but does not name the sons.

    *See also* Sennacherib.

2. A god worshiped by the Syrians from Sepharvaim. The Assyrians resettled the Sephavaraim into Samaria. The Sepharvites sacrificed children to Adrammelech ([2 Kings 17:31](https://ref.ly/2Kgs17:31)).

    *See also* Mesopotamia; Syria, Syrians.

* **Associated Passages:** 2KI 17:31; 2KI 19:37; ISA 37:38
* **Associated Articles:** Mesopotamia (ID: `7089@TyndaleBibleDictionary`); Sennacherib (ID: `8224@TyndaleBibleDictionary`); Syria, Syrians (ID: `8685@TyndaleBibleDictionary`)

