# Aquifer Open Bible Dictionary

**Tyndale Open Bible Dictionary: Aquifer Edition**

This work is an adaptation of *Tyndale Open Bible Dictionary* © 2023 Tyndale House Publishers, licensed under the CC BY\-SA 4\.0 license. The adaptation, *Aquifer Open Bible Dictionary*, was created by BiblioNexus and is also licensed under CC BY\-SA 4\.0\.

This resource has been adapted into multiple languages, including English, Tok Pisin, Arabic (عربي), French (Français), Hindi (हिंदी), Indonesian (Bahasa Indonesia), Portuguese (Português), Russian (Русский), Spanish (Español), Swahili (Kiswahili), and Simplified Chinese (简体中文).



--------------------------------

## Adder (id: 3372)

ADDER
=====

One of 20 poisonous snakes in Israel and nearby countries. It is also called a cockatrice and a viper. True vipers (genus *Cerastes, Echis colorata*, and *Vipera palestina*) also exist there. They are poisonous snakes. These snakes have special hollow teeth called fangs that move into position when they bite. The horned viper *(Cerastes hasselquistii)* can attack horses. It is 30 to 46 centimeters (12 to 18 inches) long. It often hides in the sand, showing only its eyes and the horn\-like bumps on its head.

Both Jesus and John the Baptist referred to the viper several times ([Matthew 3:7](https://ref.ly/Matt3:7); [12:34](https://ref.ly/Matt12:34); [23:33](https://ref.ly/Matt23:33)). The reference in [Acts 28:3](https://ref.ly/Acts28:3) likely refers to a small, aggressive viper (*Vipera aspis*) that strikes quickly. It is found in southern Europe and hisses each time it inhales and exhales. The poison of vipers attacks lung function and destroys red blood cells.

*See* Snake.

* **Associated Articles:** Animals (ID: `3614@Unknown`); Snake (ID: `8549@TyndaleBibleDictionary`)

