# Aquifer Open Bible Dictionary

**Tyndale Open Bible Dictionary: Aquifer Edition**

This work is an adaptation of *Tyndale Open Bible Dictionary* © 2023 Tyndale House Publishers, licensed under the CC BY\-SA 4\.0 license. The adaptation, *Aquifer Open Bible Dictionary*, was created by BiblioNexus and is also licensed under CC BY\-SA 4\.0\.

This resource has been adapted into multiple languages, including English, Tok Pisin, Arabic (عربي), French (Français), Hindi (हिंदी), Indonesian (Bahasa Indonesia), Portuguese (Português), Russian (Русский), Spanish (Español), Swahili (Kiswahili), and Simplified Chinese (简体中文).



--------------------------------

## Algum (id: 3505)

ALGUM
=====

A type of tree that produces valuable wood. The scientific name of the algum tree is Juniperus excelsa Bieb. 

People used algum wood in building projects during ancient times. Algum was used to build the temple and the palace, as well as musical instruments. The timber from Lebanon mentioned in [2 Chronicles 2:8](https://ref.ly/2Chr2:8)) is probably the juniper tree. Algum wood may have also been brought from Ophir ([2 Chronicles 9:10–11](https://ref.ly/2Chr9:10-2Chr9:11)). 

Some Bible translators believe that "algum" and "almug" are different Hebrew spellings of the same tree (see [2 Chronicles 2:8](https://ref.ly/2Chr2:8), marginal note). Others suggest the word "algum" might be an error made by someone copying the word "almug" incorrectly.

*See* Almug.

* **Associated Passages:** 2CH 2:8; 2CH 9:10–2CH 9:11
* **Associated Articles:** Almug (ID: `3524@TyndaleBibleDictionary`); Plants (ID: `7761@Unknown`)

