# Aquifer Open Bible Dictionary

**Tyndale Open Bible Dictionary: Aquifer Edition**

This work is an adaptation of *Tyndale Open Bible Dictionary* © 2023 Tyndale House Publishers, licensed under the CC BY\-SA 4\.0 license. The adaptation, *Aquifer Open Bible Dictionary*, was created by BiblioNexus and is also licensed under CC BY\-SA 4\.0\.

This resource has been adapted into multiple languages, including English, Tok Pisin, Arabic (عربي), French (Français), Hindi (हिंदी), Indonesian (Bahasa Indonesia), Portuguese (Português), Russian (Русский), Spanish (Español), Swahili (Kiswahili), and Simplified Chinese (简体中文).



--------------------------------

## Allotment of the Land (id: 3517)

ALLOTMENT OF THE LAND
=====================

After Israel conquered Canaan, the land was divided between the twelve tribes. However, the land was not divided according to what they won in battle. Instead, they fought together and divided the conquered land by casting lots (a way of making a random choice). 

This method was similar to tossing a coin (to see which side would land facing up) or drawing sticks (where individuals pick from a set of concealed sticks, one of which is shorter or marked). 

Lots were cast at other times in the Bible to determine God's will. By using lots, the tribes avoided arguments. It also showed that the land belonged to God, and he could give it to whoever he wanted (see [Proverbs 16:33](https://ref.ly/Prov16:33)). The Lord gives orders to divide the land by lots in [Numbers 26:52](https://ref.ly/Num26:52-Num26:56)–[56](https://ref.ly/Num26:52-Num26:56) (see also [Numbers 34](https://ref.ly/Num34:1-Num34:29)). [Joshua 13](https://ref.ly/Josh13:1-Josh19:22)–[19](https://ref.ly/Josh13:1-Josh19:22) describes how the land was divided at Shiloh.

The southern part of the Transjordan (the land east of the Jordan River) was given to two and a half tribes by Moses in [Numbers 32](https://ref.ly/Num32:1-Num32:42). West of the Jordan, the remaining nine and a half tribes received plots of land by lot. However, this only happened after their faithful leader, Caleb, got his choice of the region around Hebron. The tribes were given their land in order of their relative locations.

1. Judah received territory in the South, including Caleb’s lands, and extended north to Jerusalem.
2. Ephraim and Manasseh, the patriarch Joseph's sons, received large central portions of the land.
3. Benjamin received the land between Judah and Ephraim.
4. Simeon received land in southern Judah.
5. Zebulun, Issachar, Asher, Naphtali, and Dan received the land north of Manasseh ([Joshua 19](https://ref.ly/Josh19:1-Josh19:51)).

Originally, Dan received the land west of Judah. However, the Philistines lived in the land on the coastline. So, Dan migrated north and renamed the captured city of Lachish after their tribal ancestor, Dan (see [Judges 18](https://ref.ly/Judg18:1-Judg18:31)). From then on, the phrase “from Dan to Beersheba” meant all of Israel.

Assigning land by casting lots may seem strange, but to the customs of that time, it made theological sense. Rulers in the ancient Near East were believed to be representatives of their gods. They owned the lands and gave portions to whomever they wanted. After the exodus, Israel was a theocracy (God was their king). No human had power over God. So, no human owned the land. Therefore, God was the only one who could give them their land.

*See also* Conquest and Allotment of the Land; Israel, History of; Joshua, Book of; Chronology of the Bible (Old Testament).

* **Associated Passages:** JOS 19:51; PRO 16:33; NUM 26:52–NUM 26:56; NUM 34:1–NUM 34:29; JOS 13:1–JOS 19:22; NUM 32:1–NUM 32:42; JOS 19:1–JOS 19:51; JDG 18:1–JDG 18:31
* **Associated Articles:** Chronology of the Bible (Old Testament) (ID: `4552@TyndaleBibleDictionary`); Conquest and Allotment of the Land (ID: `4635@TyndaleBibleDictionary`); Joshua, Book of (ID: `6458@TyndaleBibleDictionary`); History of Israel (ID: `6092@TyndaleBibleDictionary`)

