# Aquifer Open Bible Dictionary

**Tyndale Open Bible Dictionary: Aquifer Edition**

This work is an adaptation of *Tyndale Open Bible Dictionary* © 2023 Tyndale House Publishers, licensed under the CC BY\-SA 4\.0 license. The adaptation, *Aquifer Open Bible Dictionary*, was created by BiblioNexus and is also licensed under CC BY\-SA 4\.0\.

This resource has been adapted into multiple languages, including English, Tok Pisin, Arabic (عربي), French (Français), Hindi (हिंदी), Indonesian (Bahasa Indonesia), Portuguese (Português), Russian (Русский), Spanish (Español), Swahili (Kiswahili), and Simplified Chinese (简体中文).



--------------------------------

## Antiochians (id: 3634)

ANTIOCHIANS
===========

Jews from the time between the Old and New Testaments who had largely abandoned their Judaism for Greek ideas and practices. The Syrian King Antiochus Epiphanes reigned during the second century BC. During his rule, Palestine was subjected to an intensive “Hellenizing” program, encouraging others to "be Greek" in every way. Many people in Jerusalem faced pressure to adopt Greek ways of life. This pressure came from both social and economic sources. As a result, many of these people gave up or ignored their Jewish religious traditions. They did this to fit in with Greek culture as much as possible.

Jason became the high priest by paying a bribe to replace his brother Onias. Jason worked together with King Antiochus Epiphanes. Their goal was to encourage people in Jerusalem to adopt Greek ideas and ways of life. Jason built a place for education and physical training called a gymnasium. He also introduced new customs that went against Jewish traditions. 

Many Jewish people changed their ways because of Jason's encouragement. They left behind the faith of their fathers. Even the priests stopped performing their usual religious duties. Instead, they joined in the new activities that Jason and his supporters offered. These activities were more focused on Greek ways of life. In [2 Maccabees 4:15](https://ref.ly/2Macc4:15), it says that these people were “putting the highest value on Greek forms of prestige.” In [2 Maccabees 4:9](https://ref.ly/2Macc4:9), this group of Jews was called “citizens of Antioch.” Antioch was the capital city of Syria. 

*See* Maccabean Period; Hasmonean.

* **Associated Passages:** 2MA 4:9; 2MA 4:15
* **Associated Articles:** Hasmonean (ID: `5703@TyndaleBibleDictionary`); Maccabean Period (ID: `6826@TyndaleBibleDictionary`)

