# Aquifer Open Bible Dictionary

**Tyndale Open Bible Dictionary: Aquifer Edition**

This work is an adaptation of *Tyndale Open Bible Dictionary* © 2023 Tyndale House Publishers, licensed under the CC BY\-SA 4\.0 license. The adaptation, *Aquifer Open Bible Dictionary*, was created by BiblioNexus and is also licensed under CC BY\-SA 4\.0\.

This resource has been adapted into multiple languages, including English, Tok Pisin, Arabic (عربي), French (Français), Hindi (हिंदी), Indonesian (Bahasa Indonesia), Portuguese (Português), Russian (Русский), Spanish (Español), Swahili (Kiswahili), and Simplified Chinese (简体中文).



--------------------------------

## Amulet (id: 3581)

AMULET
======

A small object worn by an individual. It is usually worn around the neck. It is used as a charm or means of protection against evil, witchcraft, disease, or other physical and spiritual threats. 

The word "amulet" is probably derived from either a Latin or Arabic term meaning “to carry.” Amulets are also known as talismans. They have been made of various substances and come in many forms. Pieces of metal or strips of parchment (thin sheets of treated animal skin) are used with portions of sacred writings (even Scriptures). Herbs and animal preparations have also been used. Semiprecious gems (valuable stones) were often inscribed with a magical formula.

No Hebrew or Greek word in the Bible is translated “amulet” with certainty. The practice of wearing amulets is sometimes implied. It is generally used with disapproval. Some consider the gold earrings worn by the Israelites escaping from Egypt amulets ([Exodus 32:2–4](https://ref.ly/Exod32:2-Exod32:4)). Aaron fashioned these into a golden calf. The prophet Isaiah condemned the ornaments worn by the women of his day ([Isaiah 3:16–23](https://ref.ly/Isa3:16-Isa3:23)). 

Most scholars regard the phylacteries and mezuzahs used by the Jews as forms of amulets. Phylacteries are small boxes that hold written Scripture verses. They have leather straps that are used to wear phylacteries during prayer. Likewise, mezuzahs are small containers that hold written Scripture verses and are placed on doorposts. Both are ways of living out the commands in [Deuteronomy 6:4–9](https://ref.ly/Deut6:4-Deut6:9). *See* Phylactery; Magic; Frontlet.

* **Associated Passages:** EXO 32:2–EXO 32:4; ISA 3:16–ISA 3:23
* **Associated Articles:** Frontlet (ID: `5312@TyndaleBibleDictionary`); Magic (ID: `6853@TyndaleBibleDictionary`); Phylactery (ID: `7728@TyndaleBibleDictionary`)

