# Aquifer Open Bible Dictionary

**Tyndale Open Bible Dictionary: Aquifer Edition**

This work is an adaptation of *Tyndale Open Bible Dictionary* © 2023 Tyndale House Publishers, licensed under the CC BY\-SA 4\.0 license. The adaptation, *Aquifer Open Bible Dictionary*, was created by BiblioNexus and is also licensed under CC BY\-SA 4\.0\.

This resource has been adapted into multiple languages, including English, Tok Pisin, Arabic (عربي), French (Français), Hindi (हिंदी), Indonesian (Bahasa Indonesia), Portuguese (Português), Russian (Русский), Spanish (Español), Swahili (Kiswahili), and Simplified Chinese (简体中文).



--------------------------------

## Anammelech (id: 3590)

ANAMMELECH
==========

A god associated with Adrammelech. The people of Sepharvaim worshiped him. The Assyrians relocated the people of Sepharvaim in Samaria after 722 BC. 

Anammelech is the Hebrew rendering of the name for a Mesopotamian deity, Anu\-melek. The name means “Anu is King.” Anu was the name of the chief god of Assyria, the sky god. 

The Sepharvites in Samaria included child sacrifice as a part of their worship of Anu\-melek ([2 Kings 17:31](https://ref.ly/2Kgs17:31)). The burning of children in the Anu cult may have been brought from Sepharvaim or it may have been something new that developed when the Sepharvites came to Canaan.

*See also* Mesopotamia; Syria, Syrians.

* **Associated Passages:** 2KI 17:31
* **Associated Articles:** Mesopotamia (ID: `7089@TyndaleBibleDictionary`); Syria, Syrians (ID: `8685@TyndaleBibleDictionary`)

