# Aquifer Open Bible Dictionary

**Tyndale Open Bible Dictionary: Aquifer Edition**

This work is an adaptation of *Tyndale Open Bible Dictionary* © 2023 Tyndale House Publishers, licensed under the CC BY\-SA 4\.0 license. The adaptation, *Aquifer Open Bible Dictionary*, was created by BiblioNexus and is also licensed under CC BY\-SA 4\.0\.

This resource has been adapted into multiple languages, including English, Tok Pisin, Arabic (عربي), French (Français), Hindi (हिंदी), Indonesian (Bahasa Indonesia), Portuguese (Português), Russian (Русский), Spanish (Español), Swahili (Kiswahili), and Simplified Chinese (简体中文).



--------------------------------

## Anchor (id: 3601)

ANCHOR
======

An object used to keep a ship or boat in one place in the water. An anchor is attached to a ship by a cable or chain. When it is thrown overboard, its weight and ability to dig into the sea bottom keep the boat from drifting. 

Anchors were used many centuries before the time of Christ. They began as simple stone weights. They developed into wooden hooks weighted with lead or stone. 

Not long after the time of Christ, iron anchors of the familiar modern shape were used. Anchors are mentioned in Luke’s account of the apostle Paul’s voyage to Rome ([Acts 27:13](https://ref.ly/Acts27:13), [29–30](https://ref.ly/Acts27:29-Acts27:30), [40](https://ref.ly/Acts27:40)). [Hebrews 6:19](https://ref.ly/Heb6:19) uses “anchor” as a symbol to indicate the stability of God’s promise of salvation to those who believe in him.

* **Associated Passages:** ACT 27:13; ACT 27:40; HEB 6:19; ACT 27:29–ACT 27:30

