# Aquifer Open Bible Dictionary

**Tyndale Open Bible Dictionary: Aquifer Edition**

This work is an adaptation of *Tyndale Open Bible Dictionary* © 2023 Tyndale House Publishers, licensed under the CC BY\-SA 4\.0 license. The adaptation, *Aquifer Open Bible Dictionary*, was created by BiblioNexus and is also licensed under CC BY\-SA 4\.0\.

This resource has been adapted into multiple languages, including English, Tok Pisin, Arabic (عربي), French (Français), Hindi (हिंदी), Indonesian (Bahasa Indonesia), Portuguese (Português), Russian (Русский), Spanish (Español), Swahili (Kiswahili), and Simplified Chinese (简体中文).



--------------------------------

## Ape (id: 3651)

APE
===

A large, tailless primate. Apes, or perhaps other monkeys and baboons, are not native to Palestine. They were imported to Israel by King Solomon ([1 Kings 10:22](https://ref.ly/1Kgs10:22); [2 Chronicles 9:21](https://ref.ly/2Chr9:21)). 

There are two references to apes in the Old Testament ([1 Kings 10:22](https://ref.ly/1Kgs10:22); [2 Chronicles 9:21](https://ref.ly/2Chr9:21)). They discuss Solomon's importing the apes on his trading ships, with other treasures. There is some question about where those primates came from. Some believe the mention of "ivory" suggests they were apes from East Africa. Others, believing they came from India or Ceylon, suggest that they were actually monkeys. 

Baboons (*genus Papeio*) were considered sacred to the god Thoth. Males of that genus were kept in temples, and the more tame females were often kept as house pets. Such baboons often had some of their teeth removed or ground down to reduce the risk of their biting. Mummified baboons found in Egypt show they were highly regarded.

* **Associated Passages:** 1KI 10:22; 2CH 9:21
* **Associated Articles:** Animals (ID: `3614@Unknown`)

