# Aquifer Open Bible Dictionary

**Tyndale Open Bible Dictionary: Aquifer Edition**

This work is an adaptation of *Tyndale Open Bible Dictionary* © 2023 Tyndale House Publishers, licensed under the CC BY\-SA 4\.0 license. The adaptation, *Aquifer Open Bible Dictionary*, was created by BiblioNexus and is also licensed under CC BY\-SA 4\.0\.

This resource has been adapted into multiple languages, including English, Tok Pisin, Arabic (عربي), French (Français), Hindi (हिंदी), Indonesian (Bahasa Indonesia), Portuguese (Português), Russian (Русский), Spanish (Español), Swahili (Kiswahili), and Simplified Chinese (简体中文).



--------------------------------

## Ararat (id: 3704)

ARARAT
======

Ararat is a rocky mountain range in Armenia ([2 Kings 19:37](https://ref.ly/2Kgs19:37); [Isaiah 37:38](https://ref.ly/Isa37:38)). 

Ararat is located just south of the Black Sea and between it and the Caspian Sea. The range extends into eastern Turkey, southern Georgia, and northern Iran. According to the Bible, Noah's ark landed on these mountains when the flood waters began to go down ([Genesis 8:4](https://ref.ly/Gen8:4)). Many people have searched this remote area, hoping to find the ark.

We do not know the exact location of a single Mount Ararat. However, there is a traditional location between Lake Van and Lake Urmia, in what was once called Urartu (an ancient name similar to "Ararat"). This area was once part of Assyria. The land around it is a high plain with very few plants, very few people living there, and empty fields of hardened lava. One mountain peak in this area is called Agri Dagh, which means "Mountain of Trouble" in Turkish. It is 5,180 meters (17,000 feet) high. Local people call it Kohl Nu, which means "Mount of Noah." Because of this name, most people looking for Noah's ark search in this area. *See* Noah \#1; Flood, The.

* **Associated Passages:** GEN 8:4; 2KI 19:37; ISA 37:38
* **Associated Articles:** Flood, the (ID: `5280@TyndaleBibleDictionary`); Noah (ID: `7413@TyndaleBibleDictionary`)

