# Aquifer Open Bible Dictionary

**Tyndale Open Bible Dictionary: Aquifer Edition**

This work is an adaptation of *Tyndale Open Bible Dictionary* © 2023 Tyndale House Publishers, licensed under the CC BY\-SA 4\.0 license. The adaptation, *Aquifer Open Bible Dictionary*, was created by BiblioNexus and is also licensed under CC BY\-SA 4\.0\.

This resource has been adapted into multiple languages, including English, Tok Pisin, Arabic (عربي), French (Français), Hindi (हिंदी), Indonesian (Bahasa Indonesia), Portuguese (Português), Russian (Русский), Spanish (Español), Swahili (Kiswahili), and Simplified Chinese (简体中文).



--------------------------------

## Areopagus (id: 3728)

AREOPAGUS
=========

A hill in Athens, Greece. It is northwest of the Acropolis and overlooks the marketplace ([Acts 17:19](https://ref.ly/Acts17:19)). “Areopagus” also refers to the Athenian council or court that met there. The irregular limestone outcropping was also known as Mars Hill. Mars was the Roman counterpart of the Greek god Ares. 

Some Epicurean and Stoic philosophers brought Paul the Apostle before the council at the Areopagus. Paul had been reasoning with Jews and God\-fearing gentiles in the Athenian synagogue and marketplace *(agora)* for several days ([Acts 17:16–21](https://ref.ly/Acts17:16-Acts17:21)). 

Although Paul's was not an official trial, trials were held at the Areopagus. Socrates had faced those who accused him of deprecating the Greek gods there five centuries earlier. By Paul’s day, the council of the Areopagus was responsible for considering political, educational, philosophical, and religious matters, as well as some legal proceedings. 

The general tone of Paul’s address does not suggest trial proceedings. He spoke as an intelligent Christian believer who was able to meet the intellectual Athenians on their own ground ([Acts 17:22–31](https://ref.ly/Acts17:22-Acts17:31)). Some remained skeptical, but his address was convincing to a few who “joined him and became believers” ([Acts 17:32–34](https://ref.ly/Acts17:32-Acts17:34)).

* **Associated Passages:** ACT 17:19; ACT 17:16–ACT 17:21; ACT 17:22–ACT 17:31; ACT 17:32–ACT 17:34

