# Aquifer Open Bible Dictionary

**Tyndale Open Bible Dictionary: Aquifer Edition**

This work is an adaptation of *Tyndale Open Bible Dictionary* © 2023 Tyndale House Publishers, licensed under the CC BY\-SA 4\.0 license. The adaptation, *Aquifer Open Bible Dictionary*, was created by BiblioNexus and is also licensed under CC BY\-SA 4\.0\.

This resource has been adapted into multiple languages, including English, Tok Pisin, Arabic (عربي), French (Français), Hindi (हिंदी), Indonesian (Bahasa Indonesia), Portuguese (Português), Russian (Русский), Spanish (Español), Swahili (Kiswahili), and Simplified Chinese (简体中文).



--------------------------------

## Apocrypha (id: 3663)

APOCRYPHA
=========

The word Apocrypha is a plural word used to designate specific Jewish and Christian books. The word originally comes from the Greek *apocryphos,* meaning "hidden" or "secret." The Apocrypha are books that present themselves as works from famous biblical persons, as revelations from God, and as key teaching on biblical faith. They were often well\-known and used among Jews and Christians, but their status as Scripture was debated. The word "Apocrypha" was used to describe these books that were not considered inspired and authoritative Scripture like the books of the Bible.

Some Christian traditions (the Catholic Church and the Eastern Orthodox Church) consider a number of ancient Jewish books written in the time between the Old Testament (OT) and the New Testament (NT) to be part of their Bible canon. These Christian traditions refer to them as the "Deuterocanon" (a "second canon," that is, a second list of books recognized as being part of the Bible). In these traditions, this set of books is usually included between the books of the OT and those of the NT.

**Overview**

Introduction

• Apocryphal Gospels

• Apocryphal Acts

• Apocryphal Epistles

• Apocrypha of the Apocalyptic Texts

• Specific Apocryphal books 

Introduction
------------

The books of the Old and New Testaments were not the only books written on biblical faith in ancient times. The OT occasionally mentions some books that have been lost since, such as the book of Jashar (Josh 10:13\). The NT also contains some allusions to written sources outside the Bible (see for instance Jude 14–15\).

Some books of that kind were included in the Septuagint (the Greek translation of the Hebrew OT that was completed in the second century BC). The books in question that were included in the Septuagint were called the "OT Apocrypha." The Roman Catholic Church and the Eastern Orthodox Church consider many of these books as deuterocanonical, although they do not agree on which books should be included in the deuterocanonical list. The Jews and the Protestant Church do not recognize these books as part of the inspired and authoritative Word of God. 

Some of the books written early in the Christian era (the "NT Apocrypha") were considered to have devotional value, but many were quickly recognized as teaching unbiblical doctrines and were rejected as heretical. All of the NT Apocrypha have been excluded from the Biblical canon (the list of the inspired and authoritative books that comprise the Bible). Only some parts of the Eastern Orthodox Church consider a few NT apocryphal writings to be canonical.

Most of the authors of apocryphal books wrote anonymously. However, some presented their writings to the public under the name of a familiar OT figure or of famous member of the Christian Church. The OT Apocrypha became a small yet important part of Jewish literature that came about between the writing of OT and that of the NT. Many of these Jewish texts emerged from the religious and political context of that period, as the Jews felt that their faith and existence were threatened by Greek culture (Hellenism) and later by Roman oppression.

A certain number of apocryphal books are also called "Pseudepigrapha" (from the Greek words *pseudes* and *epigraphe* meaning "false" and "name/inscription"). The term Pseudepigrapha reflects the fact that these books claim (1\) to have been written by a biblical person (Enoch, Abraham, Moses, Solomon, Bartholomew, Thomas, etc.) or (2\) to contain revelation originally given to a biblical character (Adam and Eve, Isaiah, etc.). In other words, these books falsely claim to have been written by a biblical person or to offer revelation originally given to a biblical person.

Pseudepigraphal books often show a strong interest in apocalyptic themes such as the creation of the world, the future of Israel and the nations, the glory of God and his angels, the messianic kingdom, and life after death. 

Many of the Pseudepigrapha are Jewish writings that were never accepted by the Jewish or Christian communities. They were written in the same general period as the rest of the Apocrypha (about 200 BC–AD 110\). However, the nature of their contents was such that they were only recognized by certain groups. Since some of these books imitated parts of the canonical Scriptures, these groups might have held their authority and inspiration to be comparable to that of biblical books.

Other religious writings from that time did not claim to be Scripture. These works preserved some Jewish and early Christian traditions. Sometimes, they added legends and other stories that did not record accurate history, or teachings that differ from those of the Bible. At that time, there were not many books about biblical faith outside those of the Bible. As a result, these few other books tended to be well\-known among Jews and Christians. The *Torah*, or law of Moses, had always been recognized as the standard of theological orthodoxy for the Jews. However, life was difficult for the Jews under pagan rule, and they loved the stories in these other books because they spoke about endurance under persecution or about how some enemies of God's people were defeated.

In the same way, early Christians found many other books related to the NT interesting, even if they were not part of the group of approved books, which included the Jewish Old Testament and the books we now know as the New Testament. Those other works often told stories about what Jesus and his followers did and included claims to revelations as well as spiritual teachings. Some of the material in these books was unhistorical and strange. Other material in these books reflected the spirit of Christ and the apostolic teachings to a certain extent. 

For the Jews, as for the early Christians, it became important to officially identify a canon, that is, an official list of the books recognized to be the inspired and authoritative as the Word of God. This process helped distinguish the canonical books of the Bible from other books that taught other doctrines, heresies or made\-up stories.

In the early centuries, some Christian scholars used the term "Apocrypha" to refer to writings not accepted into the OT and the NT canons. The word "Apocrypha" originally comes from a Greek word meaning "hidden things." By calling these books "Apocrypha," these scholars meant that they should not be publicly read. They believed that these books contained knowledge that was not suitable for the general reader. 

An example of this distinction between books for general use and those reserved for individuals who had received special instruction is found in [2 Esdras 14:1–6](https://ref.ly/2Esd14:1-2Esd14:6) (2 Esdras is sometimes referred to as 4 Esdras). In this passage, the author claims that God instructed the biblical character Ezra to make some writings like the *Torah* available to all and to keep other writings secret, such as apocalyptic traditions about the end of the world. [2 Esdras 14:42–46](https://ref.ly/2Esd14:42-2Esd14:46) speaks of 70 books that evidently were not part of the canon as they were written after the 24 books of the Hebrew canon. By the end of the first century AD, the Jews had for the most part made the difference between the writings that were fit for public use and those that were not.

The word "Apocrypha" was also used in a negative sense to describe books that should be hidden because they contained harmful or false teachings (heresies). These heresies were intended to corrupt rather than build up the faith of the readers. It was easier to prevent the spread of such books at that time, because there were significantly fewer copies of books in circulation. 

In the fifth century AD, the word "Apocrypha" started to be used to mean "not part of the canon." The Church Father Jerome urged that books in the Septuagint and in Latin Bibles that were not present in the Hebrew Old Testament should be considered apocryphal. He believed that people should not ignore these books completely because they are an important part of Jewish literature. However, he also believed that they should not be used as the basis of Christian doctrine, but only as uplifting or inspirational reading.

The Protestant Church aligns with Jerome in excluding these books from the Canon. Some protestant groups consider them a good source of devotional reading, but most do not*.* 

When Jewish scholars translated the Hebrew Bible into Greek in Egypt during the rule of Ptolemy II (285–246 BC), they added several of these books. They were not part of the accepted Hebrew canon, but were important to Jewish history and society. This could indicate that at least in some Jewish circles, the distinction between canonical and non\-canonical books had not yet been clearly made. 

Ancient manuscripts and fragments from the Dead Sea Scrolls show that the last of the canonical Hebrew books was probably written several decades before Alexander the Great's conquests in the Near East (356–323 BC). While it is clear that the *Torah* was regarded as the Word of God, the recognition of other books as part of Scripture was a longer process. It is only after these books had become sufficiently known, read and compared to the teachings of the Torah that they also became recognized as Scripture. Thus, usage and general consent played an important role in helping to distinguish between canonical and apocryphal writings in orthodox Judaism. 

On the basis of elements from ancient Jewish sources, earlier scholars speculated that a council was held at Jamnia in ancient Palestine around AD 100 to establish the list of canonical OT books. However, later studies have questioned whether this council ever took place. These studies have also shown that Jewish authorities at the time saw non\-canonical writings more as obstacles than as helps to devotion.

The books that the Jews considered to be outside their canon and therefore "apocryphal" are: 

* 1 Esdras,
* 2 Esdras,
* Tobit,
* Judith,
* The additions to Esther,
* The Wisdom of Solomon,
* Ecclesiasticus,
* Baruch,
* The Letter of Jeremiah,
* The additions to the book of Daniel (the Prayer of Azariah and the Song of the Three Young Men, Susanna, Bel and the Dragon),
* The Prayer of Manasseh,
* 1 Maccabees, and
* 2 Maccabees.

Several Septuagint manuscripts included some pseudohistorical material under the titles of 3 and 4 Maccabees. Thus, some differences of content among apocryphal books are also reflected in manuscript traditions. 

Some Christian scholars from the first centuries disagreed about which books should be included in the OT canon or regarded as Apocrypha. The writings of Augustine of Hippo (354–430 AD) played a decisive role in advancing the view that the books of the OT Apocrypha were of equal authority with the other writings of the canonical Hebrew and Christian Scriptures. This was a departure from Hebrew and rabbinic tradition. Although some supported Jerome's opposing view, the Roman Catholic Council of Trent in 1546 adopted Augustine's perspective. This has become the official Roman Catholic position. Many churches in the regions that later split from the Roman Catholic Church and that became the Eastern Orthodox Church also used the OT Apocrypha. Some of these books are recognized officially by Eastern Orthodox authorities, though not always the same ones. In some countries, none are recognized by Eastern Orthodox authorities. Protestants consider as apocryphal all of the books of the Septuagint that were not recognized to be part of the canon of the Hebrew Old Testament.

The Roman Catholic Church officially considers these works as part of the Deuterocanonical Scriptures: 

1. Tobit.
2. Judith.
3. The additions to Esther.
4. The Wisdom of Solomon.
5. Ecclesiasticus (also known as the Wisdom of Jesus ben Sirach).
6. Baruch.
7. The additions to the book of Daniel (the Prayer of Azariah, the Song of the Three Young Men, Susanna, and Bel and the Dragon).
8. First and Second Maccabees.

The Orthodox Church also includes 3 Maccabees in its Deuterocanonical list. Articles on each of these books are provided in this dictionary.

Christians in the NT period were already familiar with Jewish apocryphal works, including the apocalyptic speculations found in 2 Esdras. Therefore, not long after most of the New Testament books were written and had been circulating, other people started to write and spread their own works about Christianity. In order to distinguish these books from those that are the inspired and authoritative Scriptures, it was important to clearly define the official canon of the books of the New Testament. 

The earliest list of approved NT writings that we have, the Muratorian Canon, was not compiled until about AD 200\. Therefore, a considerable period of time passed before an official church statement could appear on what was to be considered NT Apocrypha. In the meantime, many writings of a predominantly religious nature were written and circulated. They presented themselves as teaching truth and describing various aspects of historic Christianity. However, NT apocryphal literature ultimately failed to achieve its intended purposes because the church recognized that it was spurious.

Apocryphal Gospels
------------------

A significant portion of these writings are apocryphal gospels. These writings contain stories about Christ and some his teachings. However, because they mostly feature fantastical stories, they were never accepted as canonical. 

The apocryphal gospels can be divided into three main categories:

1. Some texts resembling the Synoptic Gospels. These include the Gospel of Peter, the Gospel of the Egyptians, and papyrus fragments like Oxyrhynchus 840 and Papyrus Egerton 2\. Other papyrus collections of sayings also resemble the canonical Gospels.
2. Texts written like Gospels to spread Gnosticism. Gnosticism was a second century AD heretical belief system focusing on philosophical knowledge (*gnosis*) of the universe and humanity. These gnostic "gospels" are often written in the form of dialogues between Jesus and his disciples. Examples of this type of apocryphal gospels include the Coptic Gospel of Thomas, the Apocryphon of John, the Wisdom of Jesus Christ, and the Dialogue of the Redeemer. This category also includes gospel legends presented as originating from the Twelve Apostles as a group, such as the Memoirs of the Apostles.
3. Infancy gospels tell legendary stories about Christ’s earliest years. Passion gospels also fit into this category. These stories were written to satisfy curiosity about Christ's birth and childhood, or to embellish the canonical accounts of his crucifixion and resurrection.

The NT does not provide much information about Jesus' early years. The "infancy" gospels are intended to supply readers with such stories presented as if they had really happened. However, much of this content is purely fictional and would not convince any discerning reader. For instance, in the Gospel of Thomas, someone accuses five\-year\-old Jesus of breaking the Sabbath day by making clay sparrows by a stream. When his father Joseph goes to see what Jesus was doing, the little boy claps his hands, and the clay birds come to life and fly away, chirping.

"Passion" gospels were written to embellish the canonical accounts of Christ’s crucifixion and resurrection. Many apocryphal writings introduced ideas that went beyond the teachings of the NT. Attempts to further describe the years of Christ's childhood we know so little about have no basis in true Gospel traditions. Works dealing with the final state of unbelievers were also embellished in a manner that goes far beyond anything stated in the NT.

In some cases, like those of various Gnostic groups, authors spread false teachings on purpose, claiming to have received it from an apostolic figure. An example of this is the Gospel of Thomas, found around 1945 in Nag Hammadi near the Nile River. It tried to spread unusual sayings and false beliefs by attributing them to Jesus so that people would accept and spread them.

Apocryphal Acts
---------------

There are also some apocryphal Acts of the Apostles which claim to describe achievements of the apostles not found in Scripture. These "Acts" became the source of many traditions widely believed. Among these stories are the crucifixion of Peter upside down and Thomas' mission to India. The reliability of these traditions is questionable because these writings also contain content that is clearly unacceptable by NT standards. However, it is possible that a few details in the stories may be inspired from true events, even though the majority of it is fiction.

Due to their often heretical nature, the church consistently opposed such books. Sometimes, church councils even decided to burn them. This happened at the Council of 787 in Nicaea. Here are examples of heretical teachings found in apocryphal writings:

* The Acts of John describe Jesus as talking to the apostle John on the Mount of Olives during the crucifixion, explaining to him that it was only a spectacle.
* In the Acts of Thomas, Jesus appears in the form of the apostle Thomas and exhorted a newly married couple to dedicate themselves to remaining virgins.

As illustrated by the example above, sexual abstinence was a dominant theme. This reflected ideas originating from the Greek philosopher Plato, who held a negative view of the physical body.

Many scholars believe that the author of the earliest of these works, the Acts of John, wrote it before AD 150\. The major "Acts" (of John, Paul, Peter, Andrew, and Thomas) were probably written during the second and third centuries AD. These opened the way for the writing of other "Acts" that were mainly miracle stories meant for entertainment rather than for teaching.

Apocryphal Epistles
-------------------

* Many apocryphal writings are categorized as letters. These works, often written under false names (pseudonyms), come from different time periods. Examples include:
* The Legend of Abgar,
* Letters of Paul and Seneca,
* The Epistle of Pseudo\-Titus,
* Paul’s Letter to the Laodiceans, and
* Third Corinthians.

The last two examples are based on allusions found in the NT, much like some OT Apocrypha are also based on allusions found in the OT. In the NT, 1 Corinthians and 2 Corinthians mention other letters that have been lost. Third Corinthians present itself as another letter that Paul and the church in Corinth would have exchanged. Paul also mentions a letter to the Laodiceans in Colossians 4:16, and the apocryphal letter of the same name presents itself as that letter. However, these letters are not genuine letters written by the apostle Paul. 

Apocalyptic Apocrypha
---------------------

Another group of the NT Apocrypha can be categorized as *apocalyptic apocrypha*. The term “apocalypse” originally meant a “disclosure” or “revelation.” It was generally used for Jewish and Christian writings that resemble the NT Revelation of John, which calls itself an apocalypse in [Revelation 1:1](https://ref.ly/Rev1:1).

Like the authors of other types of apocryphal writings, the authors of Jewish and Christian apocalypses commonly wrote under the name of a famous biblical person. They attributed Jewish apocalypses to important OT characters like Adam, Enoch, Abraham, Moses, or Ezra. Similarly, Christian apocalypses from the second century AD and later presented themselves as written by important NT characters like Peter, Thomas, or James. The Revelation of John is a notable exception to this practice.

From the latter part of the OT era to NT times, some Jewish groups developed an apocalyptic view of history. They wrote works such as the five parts of 1 Enoch, the Assumption of Moses, 2 Esdras, and the Apocalypse of Baruch. These books are important for NT study because they make important connections between OT and NT ideas about the kingdom of God.

Apocalypses were written in response to historical situations that raised questions of theodicy (the justice of God). After the time of the priest and scribe Ezra, the law became more important in the life of the Jewish people than before. In earlier prophetic times, Israel often turned away from the law and worshiped the gods of foreign nations. The prophets urged Israel to turn back to God and to follow the law. After the time of Ezra and during the NT period, Israel followed the law more faithfully than ever. The Jews rejected the worship of false gods and were dedicated to worshipping only God. Yet his kingdom did not come. Instead, the Jews experienced severe persecution under Antiochus IV Epiphanes in the Maccabean period, under the worldly rule of the Hasmoneans, and under Pompey and the Roman occupation. 

In AD 66–70, Rome attacked Jerusalem and destroyed it. It was natural for the faithful to wonder where God was while these things were happening and why he did not save his faithful followers. They wondered why his kingdom did not come. Apocalypses were written to provide answers to these questions.

A key element in apocalyptic thought is the belief that history is made of two distinct ages: "this age" and "the age to come." OT prophets often compared what was happening in their time with a future when God's kingdom would be established. Apocalyptic writers made this contrast even stronger. This way of speaking of different ages appears twice in 1 Enoch, although it is not fully stated. It appears fully in 2 Esdras and in the Apocalypse of Baruch, which were both written around the end of the first century AD. 

Thus, [2 Esdras 7:50](https://ref.ly/2Esd7:50) states that "the Most High has made not one age but two" and [2 Esdras 7:113](https://ref.ly/2Esd7:113) that "the day of judgment shall be the end of this age and the beginning of the immortal age that is to come." [2 Esdras 8:1](https://ref.ly/2Esd8:1) also reads: "this age the Most High has made for many but the age to come for few" (see also Apocalypse of Baruch 14:13; 15:7; *Pirke Aboth* 4:1, 21–22; 6:4–7\). 

According to these apocalyptic writers, the shift from this age or era to the next can only happen through a powerful intervention of God that will transform the created order. In the apocryphal Assumption of Moses, there is no Messiah: It is God alone who comes to redeem Israel. In the Similitudes of Enoch, the change happens with the arrival of a heavenly Son of Man, who existed before time. In 2 Esdras, the OT Messiah from the family line of David is combined with the Son of Man mentioned in the book of Daniel.

These apocalyptic beliefs differ from OT beliefs proclaimed by the canonical prophets. Indeed, apocalyptic writers did not consider there was much hope for change in the present age. However, they did have hope for the future. Their main message is that God will eventually intervene and save his people. According to these apocalyptic writers, for now, as long as this age continues, God has ceased to intervene in the history of Israel. Evil angels and forces of demons control the present age, making it evil beyond hope. God has left this age to evil, and only in the future age will he bring salvation. Thus, writers of this kind of apocalyptic literature did not see the relationship between present history and the end of time that can be observed in the writings of the OT prophets. Non\-canonical apocalyptic writers no longer expected God to intervene in this era. For them, God had become the God of the future as opposed to the God of the present.

In the dream\-visions of Enoch (1 Enoch 83–90\), God guided Israel throughout its history. Then God withdrew his leadership, abandoned the Temple, and let other peoples harm his people. God "remained unmoved, though he saw it, and rejoiced that they were devoured and swallowed and robbed, and left them to be devoured in the hand of all the beasts" (1 Enoch 89:58\). After the Babylonian captivity of Israel, a number of Jews believed God was no longer working in history. They viewed the present world as given over to evil and all hope of salvation was reserved for a future age.

Many other apocryphal works are apocalyptic in nature. These works are supplemented by other types of apocryphal writings such as the Apostolic Constitutions and Canons. 

In addition, Gnostic compositions found at Nag Hammadi include works claiming to represent the teachings of Christ as well as “secret” instructions compiled by Gnostic writers and a few other apocryphal compositions.

Comparative studies show that NT apocryphal writings at best both *distort* and *preserve traditions* about the founder and teachings of early Christianity. At worst, these narratives *lack any historical value* and *introduce spirituality that is totally foreign to the NT*. Even when they seem to support a tradition that circulated among some churches, the evidence they present is inferior to what can often be obtained from other sources. Some writings are so useless that it is surprising they have survived at all. Some of them were indeed lost and are now only known through quotations in larger works.

Despite this, NT apocryphal writings are important because they show what appealed to ordinary people at the time. They seemed to need imaginary stories in addition to accepted spiritual truths. Some stories were vivid and creative, while others, like the apocalypses, offered an escape from the harsh realities of life. Regardless of their nature, NT apocryphal writings had a significant influence that went beyond their real value.

Specific Apocrypha Books
------------------------

### Abdias, Apostolic History of

This collection includes content from both canonical and apocryphal writings about the apostles' lives, including Paul. Some claimed that Abdias, who may have been bishop of Babylon during the first or second century AD, wrote this history. However, it was probably compiled from various sources in sixth\-century France. This apocryphal work, divided into 10 books, circulated at first in Greek and as separate volumes. The books were collected into one book when they were translated into Latin. Although mostly considered folk tales or legends, elements that are mentioned nowhere else can have some value.

Abdias may have lived at the same time as the apostles and might have seen Christ. He reportedly traveled a lot with the apostles Simon and Jude. The preface to the Latin version claims he originally wrote this work in Hebrew. His disciple Eutropius then translated it into Greek and the historian Africanus translated the Greek text into Latin. There is no historical basis to support any of these claims.

### Abgarus, Letters of Christ and

This apocryphal work includes two short letters. One letter presents itself as written by the Syrian king Abgar (also known as Abgarus). The other presents itself as a reply from Jesus. The early Christian historian Eusebius claimed to have discovered this material in the archives of Abgar at Edessa, and to have translated it from Syrian to Greek, along with an account of the feats of the apostle Thaddaeus.

According to the legend, Abgar is suffering from a severe disease. He hears about Jesus's miracles and sends a messenger with a letter asking Jesus to come heal him. Abgar also offers Jesus a place of refuge from the dangerous opposition in Jerusalem. Jesus sends a letter in reply, in which he refuses the offer to take refuge but promises that after his ascension, he will grant Abgar's request by sending a disciple to him. (Later, the letter in the story was changed to an oral response in order to make the story agree with the tradition that Jesus left no writings.) Thaddaeus, one of the twelve Apostles, goes to Edessa, heals the king, and the community converts to Christianity. There is a slightly different version in the Doctrina Addaei (written around AD 400\). In it, Jesus' reply is oral, and Abgar's messenger returns with a portrait of Jesus. This picture is put on prominent display in Abgar’s palace.

The legend is similar to the one in the Greek Acts of Thaddaeus from the fifth or sixth century AD. However, in the Acts, Ananias (Abgar's messenger) returns with a face cloth with a miraculous printing of Christ's face.

### Apocalypse of Abraham

A Jewish document that has survived only in old Slavonic texts. These texts are thought by many to come from a Greek version, which itself was probably a translation of a Hebrew or Aramaic original.

The Apocalypse of Abraham starts with the patriarch Abraham turning away from idolatry. It is based on old rabbinical traditions about Abraham's youth. It describes how he became aware of God's call on his life and came to understand that God is one and is holy. An angel named Jahoel (whose functions and powers also come from rabbinical sources) takes Abraham to the seventh heaven. There, he is shown past and future events. He witnesses Adam and Eve's temptation through sexual sin and Cain's murder. Azazel, an evil being, plays the role of Satan. These details may indicate that there was a tradition holding that Abraham wrote the first parts of the Bible. The revelation then shifts to the future. It shows the temple's destruction, plagues on those who do not believe, and the coming of the Messiah. The final form of the document was probably completed in the last generation of the first century AD.

True to his character in the book of Genesis, Abraham raises the question of evil and why God tolerates the rebellious Azazel. He learns that evil originates from human free will. This apocalypse shows how faithful Jews tried to understand evil at a time when Jews were greatly suffering. It also illustrates the unusual "doctrine of angels" from that period. Some scholars have noted that this text shows traces of edition by both Gnostics and Christians.

### Abraham, Testament of

This Jewish apocryphal writing describes the death of Abraham. In the story, when the angel Michael comes to take Abraham's soul, he refuses to die. Michael, not wanting to insist Abraham must die right away, agrees to let him see all of creation first. The angel takes him by chariot into the heavens to observe humanity. Abraham is shocked to see how evil people are and he curses the sinners, who die immediately. He then witnesses the judgment of a soul. 

Although angels participate in the trial, Abel is the main judge. The soul seems to have done as much good as evil, but Abraham's intervention leads to a favorable judgment. Abraham realizes how harsh his curse on sinners was. However, the angel tells him their early death actually served to remove punishment for their sins.

After returning to Earth, Abraham still refuses to die. Death appears in all its horror and kills 7,000 of Abraham's servants. They return to life later. However, the elderly saint Abraham still refuses to die. Finally, Death itself takes Abraham's hand, and the angels lift his spirit to the heavens.

This work is found in several Greek manuscripts. The oldest is probably from the 13th century AD. The text has also survived in Slavonic, Romanian, Arabic, Ethiopic, and Coptic. This story was probably first written in Hebrew during the first century AD. It is likely a Christian who translated it later into Greek. 

There is also a shorter version of this work, in which God lifts Abraham's soul during a dream. The work does not attempt to teach something about the nature of God or how he works in human matters. The way it portrays the angel Michael and Death is typical of first\-century Judaism.

### Acts, Apocryphal

These writings claim to tell stories about great things the apostles did but that are not recorded in the Bible.

### Acts of Pilate

*See* Pilate, Acts of (below).

### Adam, Apocalypse of

This is one of the best examples of Gnostic apocalyptic literature. In 1946, a farm worker found ancient texts in a cave about 6 miles (10 kilometers) north of the city of Nag Hammadi in Egypt. The discovery included 13 codices (predecessors of bound books) of Christian and non\-Christian origins. 

This discovery was not revealed immediately. As a result, it was only in 1958 that a French scholar, Jean Doresse, revealed the existence of the Apocalypse of Adam to the public. This apocalypse is written in Coptic and is the last of five works in Codex V.

The author's true identity is unknown. However, the subtitle spuriously attributes the book to Adam or Seth: “An Apocalypse that Adam revealed to his son Seth in the seven hundredth year.” Writers of Gnostic literature often portrayed Seth as a messenger of truth. For examples, see the Gospel of the Egyptians and the Paraphrase of Shem.

The estimated date of the earliest known copy of the Apocalypse of Adam is around AD 300 to 350\. It is possible it was written much earlier. It contains many Gnostic references, relies on Jewish history, and mentions baptism. As a result, some scholars suggest that this work might have originated from Jewish groups that practiced baptism in the first and second centuries. There are also similarities between this work and third\-century Manichean literature. Manicheanism was a form of Gnosticism.

The Apocalypse of Adam is very important for the study of the origins of Christianity. Scholars have long debated whether Gnosticism was a heretical movement that came out of Christianity or whether it had independent origins. Some scholars argue the Apocalypse of Adam is an example of early independent Gnosticism. If this proved to be true, it would make the debate easier to settle.

Besides its introduction and conclusion, the Apocalypse of Adam has three parts: (1\) Adam's summary of important past events, (2\) prophecies of the evil attempts to destroy humanity by the creator god, and (3\) prophecies about the arrival of the "Enlightener," who will guide his people to the true God.

The story begins with Adam who is portrayed on his deathbed. He reveals the future secrets of the Gnostic people to his son Seth. He explains three angels had revealed these secrets to him in a vision. Adam grieves about having become a constant slave to the evil creator\-god ever since the fall of mankind and its loss of gnosis (knowledge). It is typical in Gnostic writings to distinguish between an evil creator god who rules the earth and the true God of the universe. Knowing the true God is what gives real life.

Adam predicts the jealous creator\-god will try to destroy humanity. He will do this with the flood during Noah's time and by bringing fire on Sodom and Gomorrah to keep them from knowing the true God. However, the intervention of angels from the God of truth will keep the evil god's plan from succeeding. In time, the true God will send the "Enlightener" to teach gnosis to humanity so they can know him. The creator\-god will try to defeat the Enlightener but will only be able to harm his physical body. With the Enlightener's message spreading, humanity will turn away from the creator\-god. Then they will seek the true God through gnosis*.*

*See also* Gnosticism.

### Adam, Apocryphal Books of

This Latin work claims to tell the story of the life and death of Adam and Eve. The Greek version is called the "Apocalypse of Moses." There are also other minor versions from early Christian origins. Like other apocryphal writings, the content of this work is fanciful and the author is unknown.

According to the Latin account, Adam and Eve were hungry and could not find food for seven days after God had sent them out of Paradise. Eve is desperate and remorseful. She takes responsibility for tasting the fruit God forbade. She asks Adam to kill her and he refuses. After searching, they survive by eating animal food. 

Adam suggests as a penance they should stand fasting in the river up to their necks for 40 days, he in the Tigris, she in the Jordan. After 18 days, Satan comes to Eve in the guise of an angel, tells her that the Lord has accepted her penance, and persuades her to leave the river. Coming to the Tigris where Adam is, Eve realizes that it was Satan who had spoken to her. Satan then explains that the reason for his fall was his refusal to worship man, a lower being.

The archangel Michael is then sent to Adam with seeds so he can learn to till the land. In a dream, Eve sees Cain kill Abel. To prevent this, the parents separate the brothers and make Cain a farmer and Abel a shepherd. Later, they have a third son, Seth. 

God tells Adam he will die because he obeyed what his wife said rather than God. When Adam is in pain and near death, he explains to Seth that Satan had tempted Eve to eat the forbidden fruit and that she in turn had persuaded him to taste it. Seth and Eve travel to the gates of Paradise to plead God to save Adam's life. On the way, a snake attacks and bites Seth. At Paradise, Michael tells them Adam must die. Seth witnesses the burial of Adam and Abel.

Before Eve dies the following week, she asks Seth to record his parents' lives on stone and clay tablets. This way, if the Lord shows his anger with water, the clay will dissolve and the stone will remain. If by fire, the stone will break, and the clay will harden. Eve also warns Seth he must only show grief for six days and not on the Sabbath day.

The Greek version is similar to the Latin, but it includes a description of Adam’s resurrection. Later, this story also became part of the Latin version. In addition, the Greek version includes a detailed account of the temptation and fall of Eve. The Greek account is elaborate in its description of Adam's burial and the earth's initial refusal to accept Abel's body. Both versions probably come from Hebrew originals written around the first century AD.

### Ahikar, Book of

This Near Eastern folk tale from the sixth or seventh century BC illustrates the consequences of the lack of gratitude. According to the story, Ahikar, secretary of Sennacherib, king of Assyria, was renowned for his wisdom. Despite having 60 wives, Ahikar had no children. As a result, he adopted his sister's son, Nadan. He trained Nadan to succeed him in the king's court, diligently educating his adopted son. Yet Nadan turned out to be bad and even forged documents to have his benefactor condemned to death.

Ahikar was spared through his friendship with the executioner and was concealed until the wrath of the king cooled. Later, when Sennacherib had occasion to wish for his wisdom, Ahikar was brought on the scene, long\-haired, disheveled, and with fingernails like eagles’ claws. Once again in the king’s favor, Ahikar sternly rebuked his unscrupulous nephew. In response to Ahikar’s rebuke, Nadan’s body swelled up and his stomach burst open.

Ahikar's story has interesting similarities with OT wisdom books and some of Jesus's parables. There are references to Ahikar in the apocryphal book of Tobit, the works of the Greek philosopher Democritus, the apocalyptic Testaments of the Twelve Patriarchs, and the Koran. The story, originally in Aramaic, exists also in Syriac, Arabic, Armenian, Ethiopic, and Greek, though the versions vary significantly.

### Akhmim Fragment

Archaeologists found a document in a tomb in Akhmim, Egypt. It contains the non\-canonical Gospel of Peter. 

*See* Peter, Preaching of (below).

### Allogenes Supreme

This title of this Gnostic work means "The Most High Stranger." It was discovered in 1946 in an urn near Nag Hammadi in Egypt. The work of Allogenes is mentioned by the Neoplatonist historian Porphyry and by later Syriac Christian writings against heresy. The name Allogenes means "foreigner" or "stranger." Allogenes Supreme is a Gnostic "apocalypse" written in Coptic. It describes the creation of the higher world and praises Barbelo, the heavenly mother. The surviving copy of this work was written during the fourth century AD. However, the original version may date back to the second century AD.

### Andrew, Acts of

This apocryphal work claims to describe the miracles and martyrdom in Greece of the apostle Andrew, Peter's brother. It promotes the virtue of rejecting focus on materialism and the temporary values of the world to live a life of self\-denial in dedication to God. The earliest surviving fragment is in Vatican City, Italy. 

The original probably dates back to the second century AD. It is likely long and verbose, and tedious. Believing it had value, Gregory, Bishop of Tours, wrote a shorter version of Andrew's miracles in the sixth century AD from an original that is now lost. The story of Andrew's martyrdom probably circulated separately.

Gregory recorded many miracles, including one about Exoos, a noble young man from Thessalonica. After hearing about Andrew's preaching and miracles, Exoos travels to Philippi, becomes a Christian, and stays with Andrew. The unconverted parents of Exoos try to give money to Andrew to persuade him to tell their son to stop living this way and to return to them. When this fails, the parents refuse to listen to Andrew and set fire to the house where the Christians were staying. 

As the flames roar, Exoos prays the Lord will extinguish the fire and sprinkles it with water. With this, the flames die out. The parents and the crowd, claiming the youth is now a sorcerer, climb ladders to enter the house in order to kill the occupants, but God blinds the intruders.

Although it is night, a light shines out from the house and sight is restored to those who have been blinded. All except the youth’s parents are converted. The parents die soon afterward. Exoos remains with Andrew and spends his inheritance on the poor. After his return to Thessalonica, Exoos heals a man who has been paralyzed for 23 years. After that, Exoos and Andrew continue to perform miracles and preach to the people.

In Patrae, the maidservant of Maximilla, the wife of the proconsul Aegeates, comes to Andrew and implores him to heal her mistress. Her fever was so severe that her husband was standing at her bedside threatening to kill himself with a sword the moment she died. Telling the proconsul to put his sword away, Andrew takes Maximilla’s hand and the fever leaves her. Ordering food for her, Andrew then refuses Aegeates’ offer of 100 pieces of silver. After performing many miracles in the city, Andrew receives a message from Maximilla to come and heal the slave of Stratocles, the proconsul’s brother. The apostle restores the boy to health, and his master believes.

Maximilla's husband is furious to see his wife spend considerable time listening to the preaching of Andrew. She also converts to the Christian faith. She then refuses to sleep with her husband and one night even substitutes a servant for herself. Details of subsequent events are found in the account of the martyrdom. Aegeates is angry and holds Andrew responsible for his wife’s alienation. He has the apostle arrested. After preaching from prison, Andrew is taken to be crucified by the seashore. 

When the Christian Stratocles sees Andrew treated roughly by the soldiers, he fights his way through and walks with Andrew to the place of crucifixion. Aegeates, afraid of his brother, orders the soldiers not to interfere. At the seashore, the soldiers follow the proconsul’s command to tie rather than nail Andrew to the cross. The proconsul wanted the apostle's death to take a long time and wanted him to be eaten by dogs.

After two days, Andrews is still speaking to people from the cross, and many go to Aegeates demanding his release. Arriving at the scene, the proconsul sees Andrew is indeed still alive. Aegeates approaches the apostle to release him. Yet Andrew demands to be allowed to die and meet his Lord. Andrew dies and the onlookers weep as Maximilla and Stratocles take his body down from the cross. Maximilla then remains apart from her husband and continues in her Christian faith.

### The Story of Andrew

This fragment exists only in the Coptic language. In this legend from the late second century AD, a woman kills her child in the desert and gives the remains to a dog. She flees when the apostle Andrew and Philemon approach, but the dog reveals what happened. Andrew prays and the dog vomits up the child. The child comes back to life, laughing and crying.

### Andrew and Matthias, Acts of

This is a long document that is very unlikely to be authentic. It probably dates from the late second century AD. It is one of many apocryphal "Acts" that sought to add details to the NT book of the Acts of the Apostles. The early church historian Eusebius called this work and others like it heretical, absurd, and false.

In this story, the apostles cast lots to determine where each should go. Matthias (Matthew in some versions) is sent to the country of the man\-eaters, where he soon needs to be rescued from a cannibal feast. The Lord then sends Andrew to save him, who arrives in time to do so. Then a cloud carries Matthias away. 

They arrest, torture, and drag Andrew, who had remained alone, through the city. The apostle nearly destroys the city by calling water from a statue. Impressed by Andrew’s miracles, the people repent and release him. After that, Andrew draws a plan for a church and they build it. He baptizes the people and gives them the ordinances of the Lord.

### Andrew and Paul, Acts of

This story is only found in Coptic fragments. It tells how the apostles Andrew and Paul arrived by sea at a city. In the story, Paul visits the world below (underworld) after asking Andrew to rescue him from it. There he meets Judas, who explains he worshiped Satan after Jesus had pardoned him for the betrayal.

Andrew rescues Paul, who returns with a piece of wood. Although someone asks Andrew to heal a child, some Jews doubt him. So they do not allow the apostles to enter the city gates. Paul strikes the gates with his piece of wood, and the gates sink into the earth. Amazed by the miracle, 27,000 Jews become Christians.

### Apostles, Epistle of the

This letter claims to come from the 11 apostles. It is addressed to the churches “of the east and the west, of the north and the south, declaring and imparting to you that which concerns our Lord Jesus Christ.” Some believe the epistle was written in Asia Minor about AD 160\. Others think it comes from Egypt. It is probably to be dated from around the middle of the second century. The surviving texts include a mutilated Coptic manuscript of the fourth or fifth century, a complete version in Ethiopic, and a fragment in Latin. This epistle was unknown until the discovery of the Coptic manuscript in 1895\.

After an introduction, follows a declaration that “our Lord and Redeemer Jesus Christ is God the Son of God who was sent of God the Lord of the whole world.” The letter then summarizes of a number of incidents from the Gospels. This includes a negative statement of the Golden Rule: “Love your enemies, and what you would not that man do to you, that do to no man.” Chapter 24 introduces the subject of the resurrection. It is followed by a series of questions by the disciples, with answers by Jesus. 

A prophecy of the conversion of Paul appears in chapter 31\. In chapter 43, the five wise virgins are identified as “Faith and Love and Grace and Peace and Hope.” The names of the foolish virgins are “Knowledge, Understanding (Perception), Obedience, Patience, and Compassion.” 

The substantial part of the letter consisting of questions and answers resembles in style some of the texts found in the Gnostic library at Nag Hammadi, especially the Apocryphon of John. However, the warnings that Cerinthus and Simon (chapter 7\) are “enemies of our Lord Jesus Christ” make it clear that this is not a Gnostic document. The epistle displays numerous indications orthodox influence, but also clear departures from apostolic Christianity.

### Apostles, Gospel of the Twelve

One of many heretical “gospels” that circulated in the earliest centuries of the Christian church along with the Gospels of Matthew, Mark, Luke, and John. The Christian scholar Origen (around AD 185–254\) first mentioned the Gospel of the Twelve Apostles by name in his comments on [Luke 1:1](https://ref.ly/Luke1:1). Some scholars believe it might be the same as the Gospel of the Ebionites, which a few early Christian writings quote. We know nothing directly about the Gospel of the Twelve Apostles.

### Arabic Gospel of the Infancy

This is one of several "gospels of the infancy" found among the NT Apocrypha. This text describes Jesus's birth and is from about the fifth century AD. It includes the visits of the shepherds and the magi, the flight into Egypt, and miracles Jesus performed as a boy. It describes details about Jesus's early life, which are not in the canonical gospels. An interesting aspect of the miracle stories told in this gospel is Mary's involvement, in contrast to the stories of miracles in the canonical gospels. 

The Arabic Gospel may have been written in Syriac and translated into Arabic. Some of its stories also appear in the Koran and other Islamic writings. The study of this apocryphal gospel reveals how sharply different it is from the canonical accounts. It also indicates how this and similar writings contributed to the growing veneration of the virgin Mary.

### Arabic History of Joseph the Carpenter

This fourth\-century AD account describes Joseph's life and death, with information supposedly from Jesus. In this story, Joseph the carpenter becomes a widower after having four sons and two daughters (chapter 2\). At 90 years old, he is given the responsibility to care for Mary (chapter 14\). Thus, according to this account, Jesus's brothers and sisters are Joseph’s children from a previous marriage. Joseph reportedly dies at 111 years old. The document, available in both Arabic and Coptic versions, states Mary "must face the same end of life as other mortals" (chapter 18\). Some scholars believe it was written earlier than the fifth century, when the idea of the “assumption of Mary into heaven” was being promoted. Others believe it may been written much later.

### Aristeas, Letter of

This ancient story describes the relationships between Judaism and Hellenism in Egypt during the period when the Hebrew Old Testament was translated into Greek (the Septuagint). The author, Aristeas, claimed to be a court assistant in Alexandria under Ptolemy Philadelphus II, who ruled from 283 to 247 BC. He presents his work as giving details about the translation procedures of the Septuagint. Although estimates of the date of the Letter of Aristeas range from 200 BC to AD 50, it was most probably written toward the end of the second century BC.

As part of his massive library project, King Ptolemy showed interest in the Jewish law. Aristeas uses this opportunity to ask for the freedom and payment of all Jewish slaves in the kingdom. King Ptolemy agrees to the request. The king asks the high priest in Jerusalem select qualified persons to translate the Law from Hebrew to Greek. The story provides a detailed description of gifts sent to Eleazar, the high priest, with special focus on a fancy table. Aristeas then describes the temple, the priests, the high priest's clothing, and the temple's defense system. A brief description of Palestine and its surroundings follows.

In the next section, the high priest talks with Aristeas and the men chosen to translate the Law before their departure to Alexandria. The summary of his speech includes a careful defense of the law from a philosophical viewpoint. The king hosts a plentiful banquet for the 72 translators (six from each tribe) when they arrive in Alexandria. Over the seven nights of celebration, the king ask specific questions to the translators. Each translator gives a brilliant answer. The question, the name of the translator who answered it and his answer are all recorded. They complete the work on the island of Pharos in 72 days. Their work receives praise from the Alexandrian Jews and the king. The translators are sent back to their homeland with great gifts.

The work concludes with a section in which the author claims to have witnessed the events and insists his report is accurate. Modern scholars do not believe this to be true. Although, the story is embellished and legendary, the basic picture of how the Septuagint translation came to be is credible. Aristeas used the way he described the translation procedure to defend the merits of Judaism to the heathen world. He combined liberal views with loyalty to basic Jewish beliefs to plead for political toleration for the Jews. 

*See* the discussion of the Septuagint in Bible, Versions of the (Ancient).

### Armenian Gospel of the Infancy

This is a legendary account of the early years of the life of Jesus Christ. It is one of the many apocryphal gospels that seek to add details to the four NT Gospels. It probably came from a Syriac original and was later translated into Armenian. Nestorian missionaries reportedly introduced an "infancy gospel" to Armenia around AD 590\. However, this was not the Armenian Gospel as we know it today.

Sources for the Armenian Gospel included two books containing legendary material about Christ’s infancy: the Protoevangelium of James and the Infancy Gospel of Thomas. The Armenian Gospel expands the content of these two texts considerably, adding much new content to the life of Jesus.

For instance, Joseph looks for a midwife and meets Eve, who has come to see fulfillment of the promise that from her seed would come a Redeemer ([Gn 3:15](https://ref.ly/Gen3:15)). Later, the magi bring the testament Adam gave to Seth. Someone accuses Jesus of causing a child's death, but he is proven innocent when the child resurrects.

### Ascension of Isaiah

*See* Isaiah, Ascension of (below).

### Ascents of James

*See* James, Ascents of (below).

### Asenath, Prayer of

This is a Jewish story about the patriarch Joseph's wife. The story takes place during his stay in Egypt ([Gn 41:45](https://ref.ly/Gen41:45)). It is known by several other titles which include "The Life and Confession of Asenath," "The Book of Joseph and Asenath," and variations of these names. This story was very popular in the early and medieval Christian church. There are manuscripts in Latin, Syriac, Slavonic, Romanian, and Ethiopic, in addition to 40 Armenian copies.

Modern scholars generally trace the origin of the novel to the Hellenistic Judaism which was prevalent in Egypt from 100 BC to AD 100\. Asenath appears to serve as an example for anyone who converted to Judaism. If this interpretation is correct, the story provides valuable insight into the less legalistic attitudes of some Jewish groups before Christ. The story gives an important role to the realization of the hopelessness of each one's sinful state and the need to rely on God's mercies.

The original text of the story was probably in Greek. It has two main parts. Part I describes Asenath's pampered life before she met Joseph. Joseph initially rejects her because of her idolatry. Asenath repents in ashes. She prays to God, who sends an angel to tell her he forgives her and her name is now in the Book of Life. Joseph returns and is amazed by Asenath's new beauty, and rejoices that she has converted. With Pharaoh's approval, they marry the next day.

Part II describes the period when Joseph's father, Jacob, and his family arrived in Egypt. Pharaoh's older son desires Asenath. He therefore tries to convince Joseph's brothers, Dan and Gad, to help him kidnap her. Joseph's other brothers stop the plan and want to kill Dan and Gad. However, Asenath successfully pleads for their lives. Pharaoh gives his royal crown to Joseph. He rules Egypt for 40 years before returning the crown to Pharaoh's younger son.

### Asher, Testament of

*See* Testaments of the Twelve Patriarchs (below).

### Assumption of Moses

*See* Moses, Assumption of (below).

### Barnabas, Acts of

This document is one of several traditional stories about Barnabas, who was the apostle Paul's companion. This story connects him with Cyprus. The full title of this work is "The Journeyings and Martyrdom of Saint Barnabas the Apostle." The author probably wrote it from Cyprus at the end of the fifth century or the start of the sixth century AD.

The book presents John Mark as the person who explains what happened. In the story, John Mark says he left the apostles in Perga to sail to the West but was stopped (see [Acts 13:13](https://ref.ly/Acts13:13)). When he tried to join Paul and Barnabas again in Antioch, Paul did not allow him. As a result and after some dispute, John Mark and Barnabas sailed to Cyprus. 

After preaching and healing many people, Barnabas met his old enemy, Bar\-Jesus, who convinced the Jews to capture him. They led Barnabas out of the city of Salamis, formed a circle around him, and burned him alive. John Mark and other disciples escaped with his ashes. They buried them in a cave with scriptures Barnabas had received from Matthew. John Mark then went to Alexandria to minister there.

### Barnabas, Epistle of

This anonymous letter discusses a question often asked in the early church: What should Christianity's relationship to Judaism be? Clement of Alexandria often quoted this document and attributed it to "Barnabas, who also preached with the apostle Paul." Jerome believed this also. However, the writer does not claim to be Barnabas. The earliest claims of authorship come only from Alexandrian church leaders. The writing and interpretation style is purely Alexandrian. As a result, many assume the author wrote the letter from Alexandria.

The author of this letter plainly states there is no connection at all between Judaism and the gospel of Jesus Christ. However, he does not claim that the OT opposes the NT. Instead, he finds that Christianity is represented everywhere in the Law and the Prophets. He believed all Jewish ceremonies were spiritual revelations pointing to Christ and an evil angel had prevented the Jews from understanding this.

The letter mentions the destruction of Jerusalem, so the author must have written it after AD 70\. A second destruction occurred in AD 132, ending the Bar\-Kochba revolution. This defeat would have been really useful for the author's argument. He probably would have mentioned it if he had written this epistle after that event. 

Many scholars believe the author wrote the letter around AD 130, which was a time of strong Jewish nationalism. This nationalism would have put pressure on many Jewish Christians to return to Judaism. As a result, the author of the Epistle of Barnabas wrote to defend Christianity against Judaism.

The Epistle of Barnabas has two parts. The first section offers allegorical interpretations of the OT (chapters 1–17\). These spiritual and mystical interpretations intend to counter Jewish legalism and show how the OT prophesied Jesus Christ. The author recognizes righteous figures like Moses, David, and the prophets understood the true meaning of the law of Moses. However, he argues that the rest of Israel interpreted God's covenant incorrectly. 

As a result, the Jews lost their claim to the blessings of the covenant, which God transferred to Christians instead. This allegorical style of interpretation was very popular among Alexandrian church leaders. The NT book of Hebrews also uses this style of interpretation. The author of the Epistle of Barnabas often quotes the Septuagint, though the quotes tend to be similar rather than identical to the original text.

Until 1859, only a Latin version of the first section of the Epistle of Barnabas was known. The discovery of Codex Sinaiticus revealed the first known Greek version of the Epistle. This Greek version was included with the NT books, along with The Shepherd of Hermas and the Didache. 

The Greek version has a second section that starts with, “Now let us pass on to quite a different sort of instruction.” This section includes moral teachings that compare the way of spiritual darkness with the way of light. Much of it seems borrowed from the “Two Ways” in the Didache. It has little connection with the first section. Many scholars believe another writer added the second section later.

### Barnabas, Gospel of

This is a long Italian work, actually written in the fourteenth century AD by someone who converted to Islam. He likely wanted to take advantage of the mysterious mention of such a gospel in the Gelasian Decree, which was written no later than the sixth century AD. So far, there has been no find of any other evidence that an authentic gospel by Barnabas ever existed. This has led many scholars to doubt its existence.

### Bartholomew, Acts of

This early Christian novel claims to describe the last days and death of the apostle Bartholomew. It is also known as "The Martyrdom of the Holy and Glorious Apostle Bartholomew." The text probably dates back to the fifth or sixth century AD. It seems to have been popular. There are copies in Latin, Greek, Armenian, and Ethiopic.

In the Acts, Bartholomew travels to India and stays in a pagan temple. He brings the oracle of the temple to an end. Bartholomew also heals a person who had a demon. This attracts the attention of King Polymius. Bartholomew heals the king's daughter, who was also possessed by a demon. 

Next, he casts the false god out of the temple. After this display of power, many believe the Gospel. The king’s brother, however, is enraged and has Bartholomew beaten and beheaded. His rash action is soon punished, for he is strangled to death by a demon. The good King Polymius becomes bishop and serves 20 years.

### Bartholomew, Apocalypse of

These fragments of Coptic texts resemble the apocryphal Gospel of Bartholomew. A few scholars thought these fragments represented two works: a gospel and an apocalypse. Although most have abandoned this proposal, it is still possible to find references to the uncertain Apocalypse of Bartholomew.

*See also* Bartholomew, Gospel of (below).

### Bartholomew, Book of the Resurrection of Christ by

This apocryphal work exists only in Coptic and probably dates from the fifth or sixth century AD. Like many similar writings of doubtful authenticity, it claims to add to the biblical Gospels' accounts of Jesus. Bartholomew supposedly wrote this book to his son, Thaddaeus, warning him not to let non\-Christians or heretics read it. The book is not really a story. It really intends to glorify Bartholomew, who sees hidden things. 

The text contains many breaks. It is full of contradictions and clearly disregards history. Two different people, Joseph and Philogenes, bury Jesus' body. The book confuses Mary, the mother of Jesus, with Mary Magdalene. In his version of the Last Supper, the author goes beyond biblical statements about the bread and wine: “His Body was on the Table around which they gathered; and they divided it. They saw Jesus' blood pouring as living blood into the cup.” 

Imaginative details also embellish the account of the resurrection. Christ, for example, brings Adam back with him from Hades. The story of doubting Thomas has been greatly amplified.

The most complete text of the Book of the Resurrection is in the British Museum in London. Several other fragments exist, probably from an earlier version.

### Bartholomew, The Gospel of

Many apocryphal gospels appeared after the second century AD, often using the name of a famous person. The early church knew of these writings and recognized they were fiction. In the fourth century AD, church historian Eusebius called them heretical, false, absurd, and impious. Later, Jerome mentioned a Gospel of Bartholomew by name, along with other Gnostic gospels, in the introduction to his commentary on Matthew’s Gospel. However, there is no indication that Jerome actually saw this book or that it existed.

A work called "Questions of Bartholomew" exists in Greek, Latin, and Slavonic texts. The Greek version may date back to the fifth or sixth century AD. In the text, Bartholomew asks Jesus where he went after his crucifixion. Jesus tells him that he went into Hades. Later, Bartholomew asks Mary how she conceived and bore Jesus, who is beyond understanding. 

Mary warns that if she starts to tell, fire will come from her mouth and consume the world, but Bartholomew insists. As she recounts the angelic visitation and the Annunciation, fire comes from her mouth. The world is about to come to an end, but Jesus intervenes and covers Mary's mouth with his hand. 

The apostles also ask to see the bottomless pit and "the things which are in the heavens." Bartholomew is shown Beliar, the enemy of mankind. 660 angels bind him with fiery chains as restraints. When Bartholomew steps on his neck, Beliar explains he had the name "Satanael" and later "Satan." 

He describes the creation of the angels and his rebellion against God and how he was able to deceive Eve. Finally, Bartholomew asks Jesus about the greatest sin. Jesus replies that speaking evil against a faithful worshiper of God is a sin against the Holy Spirit.

### Baruch, Apocalypse of

This title refers to two different pseudepigraphal works:

1. The first is a Jewish document with 87 chapters. It was originally written in Hebrew, then translated into Greek and Syriac. Only a few lines of the Hebrew version remain, which are quoted in Jewish rabbinic writings. The Syriac manuscript, from the sixth or seventh century AD, is the only complete text. There are indications it is the work of multiple authors. It is based on the book of 2 Esdras in the Apocrypha. Many expressions are similar to those in the NT. This may be indicating that the author wrote the original text during the late first century or early second century AD.

    The text divides into seven sections of different lengths, containing both prose and poetry. It discusses the Messiah and his future kingdom, Israel's past troubles, and the destruction of Jerusalem by the Babylonians. The text is not consistent in addressing questions of theology like sin and suffering, free will, how many people the Christ will save, and the resurrection of righteous people. Some parts are hopeful about Israel's future, while others are very negative.

    Generally, the text considers the world as corrupt and there is no solution. A new spiritual world is coming: “Whatever is now is nothing, but that which shall be is very great. For everything that is corruptible shall pass away, and everything that dies shall depart and all the present time, which is defiled with evils.” The mix of optimism and pessimism may reflect the changing fortunes of Judaism in the first and second centuries AD. Or it could show the perspective of different authors. The message of hope is for those who follow the law of Moses: “For the righteous justly hope for the end, and without fear depart from this habitation, because they have with Thee a store of works preserved in treasuries.”

    The book's final section is called "the letter Baruch, son of Neriah, sent to the nine and a half tribes." It claims he sent it by tying it to an eagle's neck. This probably means the book was sent to Jews living outside Palestine (the Diaspora).

    Baruch was the companion and secretary of the prophet Jeremiah ([Jer 36:4–8](https://ref.ly/Jer36:4-Jer36:8)). Several apocryphal and pseudepigraphal writings created long after his death bear his name. The Syriac Apocalypse of Baruch is also known as 2 Baruch to distinguish it from the apocryphal book of Baruch (1 Baruch).

2. The second document, known as the Greek Apocalypse of Baruch or 3 Baruch, has 17 chapters. It survives in Greek, Ethiopic, Armenian, and Slavonic manuscripts. Its was first published in 1609 in Venice. It was published again in 1868\. The early Christian scholar Origen suggested its existence long before. Like 2 Baruch, this apocalypse appears to have brought together different writings from the second century AD. However, it is a Christian document meant to warn Jews who have not converted and to encourage Christians to be patient with them.

### Basilides, Gospel of

This is a polemical commentary on the Gospels by a second\-century Gnostic. The writings of Basilides have only survived as allusions and fragments in later works by several church fathers. Basilides taught in Alexandria during the rule of Roman Emperor Hadrian (AD 117–138\). His teacher, Glaucias, claimed to have been an interpret for the apostle Peter. Basilides pretended his Gnostic ideas had come from Peter's views on God and Christ. He described God in a seemingly contrary (paradoxical) way as a Being without existence who created three Sonships. Through a series of spiritual "ascents" and "enlightenments," the gospel of the supreme God, the "Gospel of Light," eventually descended upon Jesus. 

Origen declared that “Basilides dared to write a gospel According to Basilides.” Clement of Alexandria and the writer of the fourth\-century fragment Acta Archelai, believed Origen referred to an apocryphal gospel. They drew conclusions regarding the teaching of this gospel based on Irenaeus’ descriptions of it. 

Today, scholars are more in agreement with Hippolytus’s view, believing this work was not an actual gospel, but rather a sort of commentary on the Gospels. It is likely the magical ceremonies and loose moral practices of the Basilidians did not come from Basilides himself. This Gnostic sect was led by his son Isidore and continued in Egypt until the century's end.

### Benjamin, Testament of

*See* Testaments of the Twelve Patriarchs (below).

### Birth of Mary

This is an early Gnostic work which has not survived. The fourth\-century bishop Epiphanius described it as follows: “The Gnostics have a book which they call the Birth (or Descent) of Mary, in which are horrible and deadly things.” It claimed to reveal what Zechariah, John the Baptist's father, saw in the temple: the Jewish god in the form of a donkey. Critics of Jews and Christians often ridiculed them by accusing them of worshiping a donkey god. This blasphemous work is different from the "Gospel of the Birth of Mary," which is fanciful but a relatively harmless story about Mary's birth, early life, and marriage to Joseph.

### Birth of Mary, Gospel of the

This is a collection of legends about Mary's life, from her birth to King Herod's massacre of children in Bethlehem. The earliest manuscript is known as the Book of the Nativity of Mary or the Gospel of James. This is because it claims James, Jesus's half\-brother, wrote it. It was written by AD 150, as Justin, an early Christian writer, mentioned it in his *Dialogues* (165\). Postel rediscovered it for the West and translated it from Greek to Latin (*Protevangelium Jacobi,* 1552\). 

Before it was lost, they had published two major Latin versions of it called "Pseudo\-Matthew" and the "Gospel of the Nativity of Mary." These two versions date from around the sixth and ninth centuries respectively. They added more fantastical stories to the original Book of the Nativity of Mary and served as the basis for the Golden Legends that James of Voragine wrote (1230–1298\). These legends played an important role in promoting the veneration of Mary.

According to the Book of the Nativity of Mary, Mary is born to wealthy parents, Joachim and Anna, who could not have children. An angel answers their prayers, and they dedicate Mary to God. At six months old, Mary takes seven steps. As a result, Anna makes her room a sanctuary, allowing nothing ceremonially unclean to enter. She vows Mary will only walk again in the temple. At age three, Mary is placed in the temple and receives food from an angel. 

On her twelfth birthday, the high priest asks God for guidance and is told to marry her to a widower. Elderly Joseph is chosen when a dove comes out of his rod. Months later, Mary gives birth to Jesus in a cave in Bethlehem. However, such a bright light surrounds them that no one can see. When the light fades away, the divine Child is at Mary's breast. The book ends with the magi's visit and Herod's order to kill the infants of Bethlehem. Mary saves Jesus by wrapping him in swaddling clothes and placing him in a manger.

Recently, another Greek fragment from the Gospel of Mary was found (see photo). The fragment is too small to reveal much about the gospel's content.

### Book of the Cock

This is a story preserved by the Ethiopian church and still read on the Thursday before Easter. In the Book of the Cock, on the night of the Last Supper, Akrosina, the wife of Simon the Pharisee, gives Jesus a well\-prepared cock for dinner. After Judas leaves, Jesus touches the cock, and it comes to life. 

Jesus tells the cock to follow Judas and report back on his actions. The cock returns and reports about Judas' intention to betray Jesus, mentioning Paul of Tarsus as one of those involved. The disciples weep. Jesus then sends the cock to the sky for a thousand years. 

A similar story exists as a fragment in Sahidic Coptic. In this version, the crow's resurrection symbolizes Christ's resurrection.

### Coptic Lives of the Virgin

These are apocryphal works about Mary, the mother of Jesus, in the Egyptian language of Coptic. 

*See* Virgin, Life of the (below).

### Corinthians, Third

Apocryphal letters claiming to be correspondence between the apostle Paul and the Corinthian church. It was written in the second century AD and is known under the name of 3 Corinthians. It has three parts: (1\) A letter claiming to be from Stephanus of Corinth and sent to the apostle Paul about two false apostles: Simon and Cleobius. (2\) A short story about the delivery of the letter. (3\) Paul’s reply and refutation of the false doctrine.

Originally, these letters were part of the Acts of Paul, a longer apocryphal document. However, they also circulated separately. At one point, they were even included in the Armenian Bible. The letters seek to explain the allusion in [2 Corinthians 2:4](https://ref.ly/2Cor2:4) to a letter written in "great distress."

According to Tertullian, an early church father, (*On Baptism*), a church leader from Asia forged 3 Corinthians around AD 160 out of love for Paul. That presbyter’s removal from office indicates the early Christians' stern attitude toward the writing of documents falsely claiming apostolic origin.

### Dan, Testament of

*See* Testaments of the Twelve Patriarchs (below).

### Dialogue of the Redeemer

This Christian Gnostic document is also called the Dialogue of the Savior. The document was found in the ancient Nag Hammadi Library at the modern city of Nag Hammadi (Upper Egypt) in 1946\. This "Dialogue" pretends to record a conversation between Jesus and some of his disciples. They discuss questions about the universe, humanity, the end of time, and salvation. The manuscript is in poor condition. Its author and origin are unknown. Its author may have written it in Egypt during the second or third centuries AD.

### Discourse of Theodosius

The Coptic Boharic version of the Assumption of the Virgin is a main source for the Coptic form of this legend. 

*See* Virgin, Assumption of the (below).

### Doctrina Addaei

This expanded Syriac version of the Epistles of Christ and Abgarus dates from around AD 400\. The Doctrina Addaei tells the story of the interactions between Abgar, the king of Edessa, and Jesus Christ. King Abgar was suffering from an unknown illness. He sent a messenger to Jesus with a written request for healing and an offer of safety in his kingdom. 

Jesus sent back an oral reply, promising to send one of his followers to Abgar after he would ascend to heaven. The messenger of the king brought back with him a self\-portrait of Jesus, which became a treasure in Edessa. Later, Addai visited the kingdom, healed Abgar, and established Christianity there. 

*See* Abgarus, Letters of Christ and (above).

### Ebionites, Gospel of the

Epiphanius, an early Christian writer from the fourth century, quoted this gospel in a work against heresies. The Gospel of the Ebionites could be the same work as the apocryphal Gospel of the Hebrews. However, some scholars link it to the Gospel of the Nazarenes. The Ebionites followed a vegetarian diet. Epiphanius's quotes emphasizes the vegetarian diets of John the Baptist and Jesus.

### Egyptians, Gospel of the

This is the title of two different apocryphal works:

1. The first is a second\-century AD Greek work mentioned by the early church writers Clement and Origen. The book circulated it in Egypt and probably spread Gnostic teachings, especially those promoted in Syria by Simon and Menander. These Gnostics believed marriage, eating meat, and having children were wrong. Clement may have quoted from this writing to refute the teachings of the Encratites, who generally agreed with the Syrian Gnostics on these issues. The Gnostics' low opinion of women is evident in the quotes Clement used.
2. The second is a composition researchers discovered at Chenoboskion, Egypt, in 1946\. It was part of the Nag Hammadi collection of Gnostic writings. The main title of the work is the “Sacred Book of the Great Invisible Spirit” although a sentence at the end of the document calls it the “Gospel of the Egyptians.” This work discussed emanations from “the primal spirit of the cosmos.” It may have originated from the Barbelo Gnostic sect.

### Eldad and Medad, Book of

This is a pre\-Christian work that claims to contain the prophecies of Eldad and Medad. These are the names of two elders whom Moses appointed in the wilderness ([Numbers 11:26](https://ref.ly/Num11:26)). The biblical account says they prophesied, but gives no information on the nature or content of this prophesying. Someone therefore wrote a work, now lost, about this. There is a quotation of it in the Shepherd of Hermas: “The Lord is near to those who return to Him, as written in Eldad and Medad, who prophesied to the people in the wilderness” (Vision II, chapter 3\). It is the only surviving content about what is in the book.

### Eugnostos, Letter of

This is a Gnostic work that was found near Nag Hammadi. The Letter of Eugnostos is a letter in Coptic from a teacher to a student. We do not know the name of the author or when he or she wrote it. It is an early example of non\-Christian Gnostic writing. The author of the “The Wisdom of Jesus Christ,” a Christian Gnostic work, may have based his work on the Letter of Eugnostos. The letter attempts to prove the existence of an unseen spiritual domain. It also emphasizes God is distant from humans.

### Eve, Gospel of

This is a Gnostic and apocalyptic work from which only one citation has survived in the writings of Epiphanius. He was a late fourth\-century bishop from Cyprus who quoted the Gospel of Eve as part of his biting refutation of the teachings of the Gnostics and of Origen. Apparently, a cult had formed around Eve. It seems that some thought she had received special revelations because the serpent had spoken to her in the Garden of Eden. Epiphanius’s quotation from the Gospel of Eve roughly translates: “I stood on a high mountain and saw a giant and a weak man, and I heard a voice like thunder. ‘Come near me and listen,’ he said to me, ‘I am you and you are me. Wherever you are, I am there. I am spread through all things, and any place you can go, you can find shelter in me; and, by finding shelter in me, you find shelter in yourself.’”

### Ezekiel, Apocryphal

This is a non\-canonical book Josephus, a first\-century AD Jewish historian, mentioned in his writings. Five early Christian writings cite passages from an apocryphal Ezekiel. Bishop Epiphanius, in the fourth century, cited an Ezekiel parable about a blind man and a lame man working together to rob a group of fruit trees. He used it to prove the resurrection of the soul and body. 

Clement of Rome, writing to the Corinthians around AD 90, and Clement of Alexandria in two of his writings around AD 200, quoted non\-canonical Ezekiel. The pseudo\-Athanasian canon mentions an Ezekiel apocryphon. It claims to list the Bible's canonical books. The book is also named in the *stichometry* (prose written in rhythmic phrases) of Nicephorus, Patriarch of Constantinople, from AD 806–815\. In 1940, Campbell Bonner published Greek papyrus fragments that confirm the existence of an apocryphal Ezekiel.

### Ezra, Fourth Book of

Alternate name for the apocryphal book 2 Esdras. *See* Esdras, Second Book of.

### Gad, Testament of

*See* Testaments of the Twelve Patriarchs (below).

### Genesis Apocryphon

This is the name that has been given to one of the seven large Dead Sea Scrolls found in the first Qumran cave in 1947\. The Syrian archbishop of Jerusalem obtained the scroll along with three others. However, they could not unroll it or photograph it because it was in poor condition. Unlike other scrolls, it had not been stored in a jar of clay. Some small pieces broke off, and certain words on them suggested it might be an apocryphal Aramaic work related to the patriarch Enoch. Other fragments mentioned Lamech, so researchers hesitated to name the scroll after this ancient figure.

Later, it became possible to unroll it. It was damaged and incomplete. The beginning and end were missing. The inner part was best preserved, but there was damage to the writing because of the ink it had been written with. The scroll discussed Enoch, Lamech, and other people from the book of Genesis. It was an Aramaic version of the parts of Genesis that tell the story of the patriarchs. However, this version includes legends and other content in a memoir style which are not found in the Hebrew Bible. This style of writing was popular among devout Jews at the start of the Christian era. As a result, scholars have dated the original to the first century BC. The copy found at Qumran was probably made between 50 BC and AD 70\.

The scroll's literary features have caused challenges for classification. Some scholars call it a "targum" (or commentary\-expansion) of Genesis, because it freely expands and includes non\-biblical material. Others see it as a "midrash," a sermonic account of the Hebrew narrative. The scroll includes both elements and it is best to consider it as an independent recounting of certain Genesis stories. It enriches these stories with creative details like a description of the beauty of Abraham's wife Sarah, some dreams, and some accounts of plagues and journeys.

The Aramaic Apocryphon is older than the version used in Palestine during the time of Christ. It contains some Hebrew influences but is mostly written in good Aramaic, mostly similar to biblical Aramaic. The scroll's language is more recent than old Aramaic (from the tenth to eighth centuries BC) or official Aramaic (from the Assyrian and Persian periods), as certain grammar forms indicate. Most scholars consider this language middle Aramaic and date it between the Aramaic of Daniel and later western Aramaic. 

Most scholars date Daniel to the second century BC, but this needs to be modified. On the one hand, the fact that practically all the books of the Hebrew Old Testament were discovered at Qumran shows they were already written and accepted earlier. Moreover, the Aramaic of Daniel is earlier than that of the Apocryphon and fits the period when official Aramaic was the main form of that language. In other words, the Genesis Apocryphon does not provide valid reasons to date the Aramaic of Daniel or Ezra later than the sixth to fifth centuries BC.

### Gospel of Thomas

*See* Thomas, Gospel of (below).

### Isaiah, Ascension of

This is a pseudonymous apocalyptic work known by early Christians. It is also known as the Martyrdom of Isaiah, the Testament of Hezekiah, and the Vision of Isaiah. The work was rediscovered in 1819 with the publication of an Ethiopic version of part of the text. The complete Ethiopic version is the only complete version in existence. The partial Latin text published in 1832 had actually been published over 300 years earlier. Slavonic and Coptic versions also exist. All versions trace back to two Greek versions from the third, fifth, and sixth centuries AD.

It is uncertain if the original was a single work. It is also unclear whether the author was Christian, or whether the author was Jewish but his work was later edited by a Christian. The final form of the text could be from the late second century AD. Ambrose, Jerome, Origen, Tertullian, and possibly Justin Martyr knew about it. 

The contents divide into three main parts:

1. The Martyrdom of Isaiah. This material includes prophetic statements, such as the prophet predicting his own execution by King Manasseh of Judah. The document addresses the king's severe departure from the faith. Possessed by Satan and following Beliar, the king leads his people into many sins. Jerusalem, whose fall is prophesied, is called "Sodom," and its leaders are called "Gomorrah." In the style of a midrash (a devotional sermon), this section focuses on Isaiah's strong refusal to compromise or to deny his faith. The part where Isaiah dies as a martyr by being "sawn in two" seems to be the portion known by the church fathers.
2. The Testament of Hezekiah. This section is an apocalyptic vision that Isaiah tells to his king. It describes the descent of "the Beloved," a title used in this document for the Messiah. The vision includes the Messiah's birth, life, death, resurrection, and ascension. After this, it speaks about the early history of the church and the departure from faith that takes place before the Lord's second coming. The Antichrist is revealed to be Beliar or Satan, who has taken human form and kills his mother. It is very likely this description refers to the Roman emperor Nero, who killed his mother, Agrippina.

    The section is based on the biblical books of Daniel and Revelation, but was also influenced by Gnosticism. The vision ends with the Beloved's victory, two resurrections, and the final judgment, similar to the ending of the NT book of Revelation.

3. The Vision of Isaiah. This section resembles the second section (the vision) even in the language it uses. However, it shows more Gnostic influence. Isaiah departs to the home of the Trinity, the seventh heaven, and sees many mysteries of Christ. Because of this vision, Manasseh kills the prophet. Gnostic teachings, like those spread by Cerinthus at the end of the first century, are evident. Hence, they taught that Jesus, who was born on Earth, becomes the host of the Christ, who later departs from that body at his crucifixion.

Historically, the Ascension of Isaiah shows the many conflicting opinions that claimed authority and inspiration and that early Christians were exposed to.

### Isaiah, Martyrdom of

*See* Isaiah, Ascension of (above).

### Issachar, Testament of

*See* Testaments of the Twelve Patriarchs (below).

### James, Apocalypse of

There were two Gnostic apocalypses of James, called the "first" and "second." These two documents, known as the "Apocalypse of James," are in Codex V of the Nag Hammadi literature. The collection was discovered in 1945 in Egypt, West of the Nile River, near the city of Chenoboskion. They are different from the Apocryphon of James, which is part of NT apocrypha.

The first one, over 20 pages long, claims to be a revelation from the Lord to James, his brother, known as "James the Righteous." Some of this revelation would have taken place before Christ's crucifixion and others, after. 

The second apocalypse is 20 pages of Coptic text. It is a speech by James the Just on the fifth step of the temple. It contains many references to and echoes of canonical Scriptures. The work ends with a crowd throwing James down from the temple and stoning him. This part of the story recalls the martyrdom of Stephen in Acts 7\.

### James, Ascents of

This is a lost book which Epiphanius, a fourth\-century bishop from the Greek island of Salamis, mentioned in his work Refutation of All the Heresies. According to him, Ebionites, a strict group of Jewish Christians, used the "Ascents of James." In that book, James, the brother of Jesus, speaks against the Jewish temple and the sacrifices. The book also claimed the apostle Paul was a Greek who went to Jerusalem to marry the high priest's daughter. To achieve this, he converted to Judaism and was circumcised. When he failed to win her, he spoke against the Sabbath day, the Law, and circumcision.

In a commentary on Galatians from 1865, J. B. Lightfoot proposed the book’s title referred to James ascending the temple steps to speak to the people. Lightfoot also suggested James’s death was the climax of the story. According to early Christian writer Hegesippus, quoted in Eusebius’ *Ecclesiastical History*, Jews opposed to the faith threw James down to his death from the high point of the temple.

### James, Protoevangelium of

This is an apocryphal “gospel” that tells of the token marriage and pregnancy of Mary and of Jesus’ birth, childhood, and adolescent years. This apocryphal writing was discovered in the 16th century by Guillaume Postel.

### Job, Testament of

This apocalyptic work has similarities to the biblical Book of Job. The book, written in Greek, probably comes from the second century AD. Since it does not have Christian content, it is probable a Jewish author who wrote it.

In chapters 1–45, Job is the speaker. He realizes some people had desecrated a nearby temple by offering sacrifices to Satan. When Job destroys the temple, Satan first threatens him and then strikes him with various ordeals. Job’s friends try to console him, but their speeches in this book are much shorter than those of the biblical story. Elihu speaks for Satan and displeases God. Job offers sacrifices for all three friends. He remarries and has seven sons and three daughters, who inherit his wealth. In the conclusion of the story in chapters 46–51, it is Job’s brother who speaks.

### John the Baptist, Life of

The author of this legendary story claims to be Serapion, a fourth\-century bishop. It describes the early life of John the Baptist, especially the death of his mother, Elizabeth. According to the story, Elizabeth died on the same day as Herod the Great. This happened while the young Jesus was still in Egypt after his parents had taken him there. John, who was also a small boy, did not know how to bury his mother. The clouds bring Jesus, Mary, and Salome, who wash the body. Michael and Gabriel dig the grave and bring the souls of Zacharias and Simeon. After that, John grows up in the desert where angels take care of him. After they had helped John, the clouds lifted Jesus and Mary to bring them to Nazareth, where they lived.

### John the Evangelist, Book of

This is a work that the Albigenses used the most, and many believed it came from the Bogomils before them. It is presented as questions and answers the apostle John supposedly asked and received from Jesus while he leaned close to him during the Last Supper. This question\-and\-answer style appears in other early Gnostic writings, especially the Gospel of Bartholomew.

The writing contains Gnostic theology. It describes the world as if it had been created by Satan, not God. Christ was not born of Mary. He was an angel sent to Earth. He "entered by the ear and came forth by the ear" of Mary. Satan sent John the Baptist, and his followers (the Roman Catholic Church) are not Christ's disciples. According to the book, baptism and the Lord's Supper have no value.

This writing has survived in Latin only, and its current form dates to the 12th century or later. An English translation is available in M. R. James's book, *The Apocryphal New Testament* (1924\).

### Joseph, Prayer of

The Prayer of Joseph is a Jewish apocalyptic text praised by Origen, an early church scholar, as a document "not to be despised." Origen's quotes are almost the only surviving information about the work. Therefore, it is uncertain what its full content and importance were. An ancient list of OT apocryphal and canonical writings mentions the Prayer of Joseph in third place and states it is 1,100 verses long. 

Origen's quotes focus mainly on Joseph's father, Jacob. In the story, Jacob claims to be an angel and also uses the name Israel. He is the speaker in the passages quoted by Origen and he prophesies about the fate of humankind. He describes meeting the angel Uriel on a journey to Mesopotamia, where the angle wrestled with him. Uriel was claiming to be the greatest of the angels. 

The apocalyptic poet who wrote the story is alluding here to the biblical story of Jacob's mysterious wrestling at Jabbok and to passages such as [Daniel 10:13](https://ref.ly/Dan10:13) (see [Genesis 32:22–29](https://ref.ly/Gen32:22-Gen32:29)). Because Jacob claims to be "the first born of all living beings" and thus the chief of all angels, Uriel challenges him.

### Joseph, Testament of

*See* Testaments of the Twelve Patriarchs (below).

### Joseph the Carpenter, History of

The document praises Jesus's earthly father and promotes the veneration of Joseph. Some of the content in chapter 18 seem to indicate a date in the fourth century AD. In this chapter, Jesus tells his mother, "You, too, must expect the same end of life as other mortals." By the fifth century AD, many people believed in the Roman Catholic doctrine of the "Assumption of the Virgin."

The History of Joseph the Carpenter document derives from the Protoevangelium of James. It was contaminated by Gnosticism and Egyptian religious beliefs. Complete copies have survived in Coptic and Arabic, as well as fragments in Sahidic.

The History of Joseph the Carpenter claims to tell the story of Joseph's life and his peaceful death at 111 years old. In the story, Jesus tells this story to his disciples on the Mount of Olives. Joseph is a carpenter ([Mt 13:55](https://ref.ly/Matt13:55)) and an elderly widower when he marries 12\-year\-old Mary. He had six children from a previous marriage. Joseph receives a burial following the religious rites of the cult of the Egyptian Osiris after Jesus pronounces a eulogy at his funeral.

### Jubilees, Book of

Jubilees is a pseudepigraphal writing from the period of the Maccabees in the second century BC. It is a very valuable source for understanding the period that preceded the birth of the Christian church. Jubilees, the Book of Enoch and the Testaments of the Twelve Patriarchs are the most important works in Hebrew or Aramaic of that era. Like the two other works, Jubilees was also translated into Greek and used by the church fathers. 

Jubilees was probably first written in Hebrew since it claims Moses as its author and reflects a Maccabean setting of Jewish nationalism. Fragments of 10 Hebrew manuscripts found at Qumran provide supportive evidence that Hebrew was its original language.

Later Greek writers followed Hebrew sources and called it "Jubilees" and "the little Genesis." It bears also the titles of "The Apocalypse of Moses" and the "Testament of Moses." Its revisions have been called "The Book of Adam’s Daughters" and "The Life of Adam."

Complete, fifty\-chapter manuscripts have survived in six Ethiopian texts. The best of these are the manuscripts from the fifth and sixth centuries are best. The Latin text is valuable but incomplete, and only a few fragments of the Greek version remain. The Hebrew fragments found at Qumran are especially important because they date from the period of the original writing. The Bibliothèque Nationale in France holds “Éthiopien 51” and “Éthiopien 160\.” The British Museum has *Kufale,* or *Liber Jubilaeorum,* and *Enoch.*

The book of Jubilees claims to be teachings God gave to Moses while he was up on Mount Sinai to receive the Law. God communicated to Moses through the "Angel of the Presence" telling him: "Write for Moses from the beginning of creation until my sanctuary is built among them forever" (1:27\). This was to serve as a supplement to the "first law" (6:22\).

After a brief introduction, Jubilees follows the same sequence of events and stories as the biblical accounts from Genesis 1:1 to Exodus 14:31\. However, it makes quite many changes to reinterpret the Pentateuch. This Midrashic treatment of the Pentateuchal material attempts to show the patriarchs lived according to the law even before the time of Moses. The author intends to strengthen traditional Jewish faith to combat the strong influence of Hellenistic culture among the Jewish people of his time. To do this, the author does not hesitate to add and remove parts of the biblical version of these stories. The modification make the patriarchs appear in a better light. He took out of the biblical stories anything that showed the weaknesses and sins of the patriarchs and added legends to glorify them. The book portrays the patriarchs as founders of culture: Enoch invented writing, Noah invented medicine, and Abraham invented plowing.

On the basis of [Leviticus 25:8–12](https://ref.ly/Lev25:8-Lev25:12), the work emphasizes the importance of the number seven. It organizes the history from Adam to Moses into cycles of seven. The book claims this way of dividing history into jubilee periods follows revelation God gave to Moses at Sinai. In fact, it correspond to God's command. The way the author presents history portrays God as acting and reigning over Israel in a unique way that differs from the relationship he has with the Gentile world. Angels rule other nations, but God himself rules over Israel (Jubilees 15:31ff.).

The Book of Jubilees opposes the Jewish use of the lunar calendar (6:36–38\) and supports religious use of the solar calendar instead. This is part of a larger effort to reform and cleanse Israel. Israel must become dedicated to God in every way. This includes not marrying or sitting at the table with Gentiles. 

The book is surprisingly demanding with regard to Sabbath observance (50:1–13\). It prescribes that Jews who travel, buy or sell, draw water, carry burdens, trap animals, or have marital relations on the Sabbath must be put to death. These rules go far beyond the biblical requirements. They are similar to the kind of rules the Qumran community and the Essenes used.

The Angel of Presence's message prophesies the end of time but offers limited details. Jubilees expects the messianic age to begin suddenly. However, the main focus of the book is clearly on ethical and cultural issues.

### Judah, Testament of

*See* Testaments of the Twelve Patriarchs (below).

### Judas Iscariot, Gospel of

This ancient Gnostic text probably comes from the Cainite sect. We only know about it through quotes in early Christian writings, especially those of Bishop Irenaeus of Lyons. Therefore, they must have written it before the mid\-second century AD. 

The text probably included secret teachings supposedly revealed by Judas Iscariot. It might have summarized the truth of higher and perfect knowledge supposedly given to this Gnostic group. The gospel explains the "mystery of the betrayal," claiming to show how Judas's actions made salvation possible for everyone. He either prevented the destruction of Christ's truth or stopped the Archons from blocking Christ's crucifixion, as they feared it would destroy their evil power.

### Lentulus, Letter of

This letter is written by a character named Lentulus, presented as a predecessor of Pontius Pilate. The letter claims to be a report written to the Roman." It describes Jesus in detail: "tall and handsome, with a face that inspires reverence, love, and fear. His hair is dark, shiny, curly, and parted in the middle, and his face has a delicate redness." There is considerable doubt this letter is authentic.

### Levi, Testament of

*See* Testaments of the Twelve Patriarchs (below).

### Adam and Eve, Lives of

This is a common title of a non\-canonical writing that exists in Greek and Latin. This book has Jewish roots, but it shows Christian influence. For this reason, most scholars date the original work to the start of the Christian era. The book is an expansion of the biblical story of Adam and Eve.

The Greek version begins with God sending Adam and Eve out of Eden. Eve has a dream in which she sees the murder of Abel. After Adam became ill, Seth and Eve went to get oil from the tree of life. Michael the archangel met Seth and told him Adam was going to die. When Adam died, God took him to the third heaven. Seth saw the angels bury his father and received instructions on how to bury his mother, who died a week later.

The Latin version provides more details. After they had to leave the Garden, Eve asked Adam to kill her. Instead, Adam suggested they both do an act of penitence. Adam stood in the Jordan River for 40 days, and Eve stood in the Euphrates River for 37 days. While she was there, Satan tempted her again, pretending to be an angel of light. Adam eventually exposed Satan. Satan then explained why he was hostile toward them: When the angels were commanded to worship the Lord, Satan refused to bow to God and God threw him out of heaven.

### Matthew, Martyrdom of

This loosely organized story of Matthew's martyrdom borrows heavily from the "Acts of Andrew and Matthias." It assumes Matthias was actually Matthew. The document shows the low literary and theological quality of later apocryphal texts.

The story starts when Jesus asks Matthew to plant a staff in Myrna, a city of man\-eaters. Matthew plants the staff after throwing out the demon Asmodeus from the king's wife and family. The staff grows into a tree overnight. Matthew preaches to the people, and they “become humanized.”

However, Asmodeus wants revenge and advises the king to burn Matthew. The fire destroys golden idols and many soldiers, then turns into a dragon and chases the king. The king pleads with Matthew for help, but Matthew dies.

A somewhat repentant but not yet converted king places the body of Matthew in an iron casket and sinks it secretly in the sea. The next day, Matthew appears on the sea with two shining men and a "beautiful" child. The king finally converts to Christianity, gets baptized, and joins the church. Matthew appears to give the king his own name and ordains him as a priest, and the king's family as deacons and deaconesses. Then, Matthew ascends to heaven with two angels.

### Medad, Book of Eldad and

*See* Eldad and Medad, Book of (above).

### Moses, Assumption of

A Jewish legend that claims Moses was taken up into heaven in body or spirit. Its author probably wrote it between AD 7 and 30\. It may combine two earlier works and borrows heavily from the book of Deuteronomy. The work probably intended to give Moses a miraculous end of life similar to that of the prophet Elijah. However, this legend contradicts the OT account of Moses's death ([Dt 32:48–50](https://ref.ly/Deut32:48-Deut32:50); [34:5–7](https://ref.ly/Deut34:5-Deut34:7)). The Assumption of Moses is the title of two works:

***The Lost Assumption of Moses***

Three facts suggest there was once an apocryphal book about the legend of the assumption of Moses: 

1. Early lists of apocryphal works mention a book with this title.
2. Several church fathers refer to it.
3. A few Greek fragments have survived.

The following events appeared in the work. God sent the archangel Michael to bury Moses's body. Satan opposed the burial, because he claimed authority over all physical matter and because Moses was a murderer. Michael opposed Satan's claims and accused him of tempting Eve in the Garden of Eden. 

Joshua and Caleb witnessed Moses's unusual assumption or ascension. They saw Moses's dead body buried in the mountain and at the same time they also saw Moses himself in the company of the angels. So, Moses' body died, but his spirit did not.

Many have stated the Letter of Jude quotes the Assumption of Moses in verse [9](https://ref.ly/Jude1:9), but this cannot be proven. The parts of the book that are needed to verify this are lost. Church fathers like Clement of Alexandria (died AD 215\) and Origen (lived around 185–254\) thought the Assumption of Moses was the source for [Jude 1:9](https://ref.ly/Jude1:9). They had both works, but we only have Jude, so we cannot verify their conclusions. This question has become more complicated because there is now another work that is also called the Assumption of Moses. People often suppose [Jude 1:9](https://ref.ly/Jude1:9) is a quotation from that book, but it is not.

***The Existing Assumption of Moses***

This work may have been written during Jesus's lifetime. It claims to describe Moses' predictions to Joshua about the future of Israel. Like other apocryphal non\-historical writings that claim to have been written by great Jewish leaders, it is pseudonymous.

In 1861, someone accidentally discovered it in the Ambrosian Library in Milan, Italy. The manuscript, from the fifth century AD, is a poor copy of a Latin translation. This Latin version might come from a Greek translation of a Hebrew original. The beginning and end are missing. There are many spelling mistakes, and there are no spaces between words. As a result, scholars have long debated the reading, interpretation, and translation of entire verses.

The first three lines are missing, so we do not know what its original title was. When it was found, people assumed it was the Assumption of Moses that had been lost for a long time, but this is now widely doubted. Although the book is still called by this title, it is more probable it is the "Testament of Moses," which is mentioned in early lists of apocryphal works. It could also be a work that has combined the "Testament" and the "Assumption."

The book may mention Moses' assumption only once, in relation to his death (As. Mos. 10:12\), but there is debate as to whether this is even the correct reading of the word in question. Since the book's ending is missing, we cannot know the content of the conclusion. We also cannot tell if this reference to Moses's assumption is original or added later by mistake or by an editor merging two different works. However, it is clear in the surviving text Moses expected to die (As. Mos. 1:15; 10:12–14\) and Joshua was also sure that he would (As. Mos. 11:4–8\).

The surviving text starts in the middle of a sentence, with three lines missing, and dates Moses's speech to 2,500 years after creation (As. Mos. 1:2–5\). Moses, expecting to die, calls Joshua. He encourages him and tells him God created the world for the Israelites. They will repent before the consummation at the end of days (As. Mos. 1:6–18\).

Moses prophesies Israel's future. The people will inherit the land of Canaan. Local leaders, chiefs (judges?), and kings will govern them (As. Mos. 2:1–3\). The kingdom will divide, and the people will worship idols (2:4–9\). A king from the east (Nebuchadnezzar) will take two tribes into captivity for about 77 years. During this time, they will remember Moses's warnings (As. Mos. 3:1–14; see [Jer 25:11–12](https://ref.ly/Jer25:11-Jer25:12); [Dt 28:15–68](https://ref.ly/Deut28:15-Deut28:68); [30:15–20](https://ref.ly/Deut30:15-Deut30:20)). 

Someone (Daniel) will pray for their deliverance (see [Dn 9:4–19](https://ref.ly/Dan9:4-Dan9:19)). God will convince a king (Cyrus) to let the Israelite exiles return home (As. Mos. 4:1–6; see [Is 45:1–6](https://ref.ly/Isa45:1-Isa45:6); [Ezr 1:1–4](https://ref.ly/Ezra1:1-Ezra1:4)). Some exiles will return to their appointed place (Jerusalem) and rebuild the walls. However, they will not be able to offer proper sacrifices (As. Mos. 4:7–8; contrast with [Ezr 3:1–7](https://ref.ly/Ezra3:1-Ezra3:7)). Others will stay in exile but will increase in number (4:9\). This part of the book concludes the predictions about the OT period and begins predictions about the intertestamental period, around 400 to 1 BC.

The book describes the widespread apostasy during the Seleucid period (around 201–267 BC). It particularly focuses on priests and judges (As. Mos. 5:1–6\). There is no allusion to the Maccabees, who gained political independence from Syria in 164 BC. Instead, the focus is on the Hasmonean kings who made themselves high priests (As. Mos. 6:1\). 

Next, an arrogant king (Herod the Great, 37–4 BC), will rule harshly (As. Mos. 6:2–7\). Then, a powerful western king will conquer the people, take some captive, crucify others, and burn part of the temple (As. Mos. 6:8–9\).

The predictions have now caught up to the author's own time period. He can no longer portray events that have already taken place as Moses' predictions and is forced to try to guess what might happen. As a result, the predictions which he places in Moses' mouth become more general and obscure and often did not happen. The next rulers (Sadducees?) would be impious, treacherous, gluttons, deceitful, and worried about ceremonial uncleanness while living in luxury at the expense of the poor (7:1–10\).

An unprecedented time of wrath would follow, when a great king would persecute the Jews, torturing, imprisoning, and even crucifying them for practicing circumcision (As. Mos. 8:1–5\). During this persecution, a man named Taxo, a Levite with seven sons, would remain true to God. He would choose to die rather than adopt Greek customs (As. Mos. 8:1–7\).

The next section is an apocalyptic poem of ten stanzas with three lines each (As. Mos. 10:1–10\). It is the only apocalyptic part of the book. The Lord's kingdom will appear, Satan will be no more, and the chief angel, Michael, will avenge Israel (As. Mos. 10:1–2\). "The Heavenly One will rise from His royal throne." There will be miracles and signs on earth and in the sky. Even the ocean will retire all the way to the abyss (As. Mos. 10:3–6\). 

The Most High, the eternal God, will appear and punish the Gentiles, destroying their idols (As. Mos. 10:7\). However, Israel will be happy and exalted, rejoicing to see her enemies in Gehenna (hell) and gratefully praising her creator (As. Mos. 10:8–10\). The composition ends with Moses mentioning his death and offering words of comfort to Joshua, but the end is incomplete.

The book was probably written after Herod died and the Roman general Varus stopped a rebellion in Judea (4 BC). It was also before the Romans destroyed the temple in AD 70\. The book predicts Herod's sons would not rule as long as their father had (34 years, 37–4 BC). This prediction may be based on the fact one of his sons, Archelaus, was deposed after a 10\-year rule (4 BC–AD 6\). If this is correct, the author must have written the book after AD 6\. 

However, two other sons, Philip and Antipas, ruled longer than their father. Since it seems the author did not know this yet, the book must been written within 34 years of Herod's death. This would mean the author wrote it before AD 30\. Thus, the book was likely written between AD 6 and 30\. This would also mean it reflects the way some Jews were thinking during Jesus's lifetime.

The author was evidently a Jew from Palestine. He probably did not belong to any of the major Jewish religious group of his time. He disliked Roman rule (As. Mos. 8:1–10:10\), but did not support rebellion like the Zealots and their predecessors. His interest in the temple was not typical of an Essene (As. Mos. 2:8–9; 5:3; 6:9; 8:5\). He condemned the lifestyle of the Sadducees (7:3–10\) and his use apocalyptic writing was probably unusual for a Pharisee (As. Mos. 10:1–10\).

### Naphtali, Testament of

*See* Testaments of the Twelve Patriarchs (below).

### Nicodemus, Gospel of

This is another title for the non\-canonical work, Acts of Pilate. 

*See* Pilate, Acts of (below) for more information.

### Noah, Book of

The book of Jubilees makes an allusion to a book Noah supposedly wrote: “Noah wrote down all things in a book as we instructed him concerning every kind of medicine. Thus the evil spirits were precluded from (hurting) the sons of Noah” (*Jub.* 10:13; see also 21:10\). Some scholars believe parts of 1 Enoch are based on the Book of Noah (*1 En.* 6–11, 54–55, 60, 65–69, 106–110\). These sections discuss the great flood and topics Noah could be presumed to have had knowledge about. Unfortunately, no separate manuscript of the book of Noah exists today.

### Odes of Solomon

*See* Solomon, Psalms of (below).

### Twelve Patriarchs, Testaments of

*See* Testaments of the Twelve Patriarchs (below).

### Paul, Acts of

*See* Paul and Thecla, Acts of (below).

### Paul, Acts of Andrew and

*See* Andrew and Paul, Acts of (above).

### Paul and Thecla, Acts of

The Acts of Paul and Thecla is part of the apocryphal work known as the "Acts of Paul." A church elder who lived in Asia apparently wrote it in the late second century AD. Tertullian said that he wrote it out of "love of Paul" (*On Baptism* 17\.19–21\). However, the church removed him from his position for creating this document. It is not clear if the church removed him because his work is falsely presented as if an apostle had written it, or if they considered the viewpoints expressed in his work to be heretical.

The style of the story resembles that of a folk tale. The apostle Paul arrives in Iconium after escaping from Antioch. Onesiphorus meets him and welcomes him into his home. A group gathers there to hear Paul's message. Thecla was sitting beside the window of a neighboring house. She could not see Paul, but listened closely to his message. Her mother, Thecleia, exclaims, “My daughter, like a spider, is bound by his words to the window, seized by a new craving and a terrible passion.” Paul teaches that to "see God," a person must live a life of abstinence from sexual activity.

Thecla was already engaged to become married, but she is so impressed with Paul's teaching that she decides to break her engagement to Thamyris. Thamyris is in distress and appeals to the governor of the city. The governor arrests and imprisons Paul. Thecla gives the jailer a gift of bracelets and a silver mirror so she can enter Paul's jail cell. She is once again fascinated by his teaching. 

At the trial, Thecla firmly refuses to marry Thamyris. They ban Paul from the city and sentence Thecla to be burned to death. By a miracle, her life is spared and she reunites with Paul and travels with him to Antioch.

In Antioch, Thecla rejects the advances of a nobleman named Alexander and again they sentence her to death. However, the wild beasts that were to devour her in the public arena end up licking her feet and protecting her instead. When she jumps into a water cistern to be baptized, her life is once again spared. 

A lightning flash kills the fish in the water, and they float dead to the surface. Queen Tryphaena, who has become Thecla's friend, faints in shock as people try to kill Thecla a number of times. Seeing this, Alexander finally asks the governor to release her.

Free once more, Thecla looks for Paul. She disguises herself as a man by wearing a man's clothing. When she arrives in Myra, she finds Paul and announces to him that she is returning to Iconium. Paul commands her to “teach the word of God.” After teaching for a while in Iconium, Thecla travels to Seleucia.

The story of the rest of Thecla's later life is not well documented. Some manuscripts say she was afraid of the people of Seleucia, so she moved to a mountain and lived in a cave. There, she lived an ascetic life, taught women who visited her, and had a healing ministry. Later, she traveled to Rome to find Paul, but he had already died. Thecla died at the age of 90, and they buried her near her beloved teacher's tomb.

This work is apocryphal and is not part of the NT canon. However, some early writers held it in high regard. Origen and Hippolytus wrote about the Acts of Paul, which includes this document, with respect. The ancient Christian historian Eusebius thought the story in this work was not true, but he did not consider it as bad as some other heretical works. 

In two manuscripts of 2 Timothy (3:11; 4:19\), the copyist added a note in the margin connecting the verses to story details which are found in the Acts of Paul. It is probable that this document reflected popular traditions that were widely known in the second century AD.

On the other hand, the church father Tertullian argues the document is quite out of harmony with Paul’s attitudes in the canonical material. In particular, Tertullian objects Paul would never have permitted a woman to teach and to baptize (*On Baptism* 17\.21–23\). While the Acts of Paul and Thecla may differ from Paul's views, it is not as Tertullian suggests. The clearest contradiction of Paul's teaching in the NT is that the Acts portray him lending support to the "Encratite" teaching that celibacy is necessary for salvation. 

In the NT, Paul teaches salvation is not obtained by works, but is through faith and a gift of grace. When he discusses celibacy, he clearly indicates it is a special calling, not a requirement for all Christians ([1 Cor 7:1–7](https://ref.ly/1Cor7:1-1Cor7:7)). The Acts of Paul and Thecla suggest a woman must dress like a man and avoid marriage to exercise a leadership ministry. However, the canonical Paul indicated that while prophesying, a prophetess should dress in a way specifically appropriate for a woman ([1 Cor 11:4–6](https://ref.ly/1Cor11:4-1Cor11:6)). Paul wrote favorably about the ministry of some married women ([Rom 16:3](https://ref.ly/Rom16:3)). The Acts of Paul and Thecla set as example a woman who was driven by personal dedication to the apostle. In the NT, Paul discouraged others from showing personal allegiance to a Christian ([1 Cor 1:12–17](https://ref.ly/1Cor1:12-1Cor1:17)). It is personal devotion to Christ that should motivate Christian ministry.

The Acts of Paul and Thecla provides us a rare description of Paul's appearance: “a short man with a bald head and crooked legs, healthy, with joined eyebrows and a slightly hooked nose, full of friendliness; sometimes he looked like a man, and other times he had the face of an angel.” This description is probably not reliable in any historical sense. Aside from claiming he had at times "the face of an angel," the rest of the description probably represents a typical Jew of that time. However, since there is no other physical description of the apostle in early documents, this one has influenced many portraits of Paul over the centuries.

### Paul, Apocalypse of

This document originates from the late fourth century AD. It assumes that the man whom Paul describes in [2 Corinthians 12:2–4](https://ref.ly/2Cor12:2-2Cor12:4) is himself, and that he describes experiences he supposedly had when he went up into the third heaven, or "paradise." Since Paul did not provide details about what the man saw or heard during this vision, it sparked the imagination of the unknown author of this apocalypse. Several clues seem to indicate the author was probably a monk who disapproved of the insincere and hypocritical religiosity of his contemporaries, both laymen and clergy. On the one hand, he delights in describing the tortures experienced in hell by a presbyter, bishop, and deacon (chapters 34–36\). On the other hand, he praises the devotion and piety of monks, nuns (chapters 7–9\), and those who are virgins or chaste (chapter 22\).

This book was first written in Greek. It survived in relatively complete form in Latin. The fact it was translated into Ethiopic, Coptic, Syriac, and Latin shows that it was popular.

The book is loosely structured in seven sections. It starts with a brief introduction explaining why the book was unknown from the first to the fourth century AD (chapters 1–2\). The story takes place during the rule of Emperor Theodosius Augustus the Younger and Cynegius, showing the document was probably written in AD 388\. According to the story, an unknown respected person received a revelation from an angel at that time. That man lived in Tarsus, in a house he claims was once occupied by the apostle Paul. The angel instructed him to dig up the foundations and to publish what he would find. The angel punished him for not obeying. Then he finally dug up the foundations and discovered a marble box. He immediately delivered it to the emperor. The emperor opened the box and found the original version of the Apocalypse of Paul (which he copied), along with a pair of shoes Paul used on his missionary journeys. The book continues by detailing the content of the mysterious document:

1. In chapters 3–6, Paul receives a message from God. It says all creation is under God's control, except for humans.
2. Chapters 7–10 describe how guardian angels of every man and woman report to God every morning and evening about their deeds. Some people are very good, while others are exceedingly wicked.
3. In chapters 11–18, Paul is taken up to the third heaven in the Holy Spirit. He asks to see the souls of the righteous and sinners as they leave the world. The angel who is with Paul shows him a righteous man leaving the world, an ungodly man, and the soul of someone who thought he was righteous but was not.
4. Chapters 19–30 describe Paul lifted up to the third heaven (see [2 Cor 12:2–4](https://ref.ly/2Cor12:2-2Cor12:4)). There he saw a golden gate between golden pillars. Golden tablets on top of the pillars contained the names of the righteous.

    In "Paradise," Enoch and Elijah welcomed him and showed him things he could not share with others (chapter 21; compare with [2 Cor 12:4](https://ref.ly/2Cor12:4)). From there, he went to the second heaven and then to the firmament surrounded by Ocean (chapter 21\). At that place, he saw the waters of Lake Acherusia that were white like milk. There was the city of Christ. He was brought to the city in a golden boat while 3,000 angels sang a hymn. At the river of honey, he met Isaiah, Jeremiah, Ezekiel, and other prophets (chapter 25\).

    At the river of milk, he saw the infants killed by Herod (chapter 26\). At the river of wine, he met Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, Lot, and Job (chapter 27\). At the river of oil, he met those fully dedicated to God (chapter 28\). In the center of the city, by a great altar, King David sang the hallelujah to God.

5. Paul's tour of hell is in chapters 31–44\. It is a place of sorrow and distress, in which flows a river of boiling fire. In the river, some of those condemned to hell have water going up to their knees. For others, the river goes up to their stomach or lips, depending on their sins (chapter 31\). Chapters 34–36 describe the tortures of a priest, a bishop, and a deacon. This section seems to enjoy detailing the most horrible tortures a person could imagine. Finally, in chapter 44, Christ decides that, for Paul's sake, there would be no torture on Sundays from that time on.
6. Paul's travel guide is an angel who takes him to Paradise (chapters 45–51\). There the righteous from all times are eager to meet him. He meets the Virgin Mary (chapter 46\), Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, along with his 12 sons (chapter 47\).

    He also meets Moses, who weeps for the Jews who have not become Christians (chapter 48\). He meets Isaiah, Jeremiah, and Ezekiel, each describing their martyrdom. In addition, he meets Lot and Job (chapter 49\), Noah (chapter 50\), Elijah, Elisha, Zechariah and his son, John the Baptist, and Adam (chapter 51\).

    The document may end here. In other versions, it ends with Paul's miraculous journey to the Mount of Olives, where he and the other disciples receive a divine mission.

The document contains many contradictions and inconsistencies. Many translated versions do not agree with each other in all the details. This document is mostly useful in providing insights into the way some late fourth\-century AD Christians thought.

### Paul, Passion of

This is a revised Latin version of the apocryphal Martyrdom of Paul which was part of a larger collection called the "Acts of Paul." The original story tells how Paul revived Patroclus, Nero’s cupbearer. Patroclus died after falling from a window during one of Paul's sermons. Patroclus declares his new faith in Christ before Nero, who is stunned. 

The emperor then acts quickly to round up all the "soldiers of the great king (Christ)," including Paul. The Passion adds to the story by mentioning the admiration Seneca supposedly had for Paul and his writings, which he read to Nero. On his way to execution, Paul borrows a handkerchief from Plautilla, promising to return it. When the soldiers mock her, she shows them the handkerchief with blood on it.

### Paul, Passion of Peter and

*See* Peter and Paul, Passion of (below).

### Pearl, Hymn of the

*See* Thomas, Acts of (below).

### Peter and Paul, Passion of

This writing exists in two versions, both believed to be the work of Marcellus in the fifth century AD. The first version is similar to the Acts of Peter and Paul. It focuses on Paul's journey to Rome. The second version emphasizes the time when they resided in Rome, especially their stay in the home of a relative of Pontius Pilate. Both versions emphasize the close relationship between Peter and Paul and their successful opposition to Simon Magus, who claims to be the Christ. The writings include their death sentences, but only briefly describe their martyrdoms.

### Peter, Gospel of

*See* Akhmim Fragment (above).

### Peter, Preaching of

This document survives only in fragments. It probably originates from the early second century AD in Egypt. Although the title does not openly state that Peter wrote it, Clement of Alexandria (late second century AD) believed the apostle Peter was its author (*Stromata* 2\.15\.68\). Most fragments of the Preaching of Peter are preserved as short quotations in the writings of Clement of Alexandria.

The fourth\-century AD church historian Eusebius of Caesarea noted that none of the ancient authorities had accepted the Preaching of Peter (*Historia Ecclesiastica* 3\.3\.1–4\). He might not have known about its acceptance by Clement, or perhaps does not include him among the authorities. Only fragments of the document have survived. Yet they are important because they show a transition stage in early Christian literature. In the first century AD, Christian literature, including all of the NT, was written for Christians. In the second century, Christian writers began to defend their faith against criticisms from pagan and Jewish opponents. 

A new type of Christian literature, the "apology" (meaning "defense"), began to appear in the early second century AD with writings by the earliest Christian apologists, Quadratus and Aristides. The Preaching of Peter represents a transition from the kind of apologetic writing and sermons found in the Acts of the Apostles and the writings of the early apologists.

Since Clement quotes from different parts of the Preaching of Peter, we cannot determine the original order of the passages quoted. Some of the major emphases of the document will appear from the following summaries of the quotations of Clement. According to Clement, Peter called the Lord both "Law and Word" in the "Preaching" (*Stromata* 1\.29\.182; 2\.15\.68\). Mankind must recognize that *one* God created the beginning of all things and has the power to bring all things to an end (*Stromata* 6\.5\.39–41\). The pagans, whom the Preaching of Peter's author opposed, believed in a universe that was not created but is eternal. 

The author underlines God is invisible, beyond understanding, needs nothing, is inconceivable, everlasting, imperishable, and uncreated. No one should worship this God like the Greeks do. They have foolishly made images from common materials and worship them as gods. They also sacrifice animals, meant for food, to these idols. 

People should not imitate the Jewish way of worship either. Jews, he claims, revere angels, archangels, months, and the moon. If any Israelite repents, they will find forgiveness (*Stromata* 6\.5\.43\). In one place, the Preaching of Peter narrates how the Lord sent disciples to spread the gospel worldwide after the resurrection (*Stromata* 6\.6\.48\). The link between this part of the story and the earlier apologetic arguments is unclear. 

The document might have started with a unique version of the great commission of Christ (see Matthew 28:18–20\). Elsewhere, it states the OT prophets speak of Christ, sometimes in parables and enigmas, and other times very plainly (*Stromata* 6\.15\.128\). In fact, the prophets prophesied the major events of Christ's life in detail: his coming, torture, crucifixion, death, resurrection, and ascension into heaven.

The surviving fragments of the Preaching of Peter are important because they show how early second\-century AD Christianity shifted from a defensive to an offensive position in its proclamation of the Gospel.

### Peter, Slavonic Acts of

This is an account of Peter's later travels and his death in Rome that has only survived in the Slavonic language. In this story, a child, later revealed as Jesus, tells the apostle Peter to go to Rome. The angel Michael is captain of the ship taking them there. After arriving, Peter asks the child to catch fish, and he catches 12,000 in one hour. The child is then sold to a Roman noble man, Aravistus, for 50 pieces of gold. The child silences his teachers. 

After seeing angels, the entire household of Aravistus gets baptized. Nero arrests Peter, and the child rebukes him. Many dead resurrect, but the child sends them back to their graves to await the resurrection by Michael. They crucify Peter up side down. When the child reveals he is Jesus, the nails fall from Peter’s body. Peter prays for God to forgive those who executed him and then he dies. 

Such apocryphal stories about early church leaders often include imaginary acts of the apostles and their interactions with Christ.

### Peter's Letter to Philip

This letter is part of the Christian Gnostic texts found in 1947 at Nag Hammadi. It probably dates from the late second or early third century. The letter's name comes from a beginning section where the apostle Peter says he sent the letter to the apostle Philip. 

The letter is written in the form of a dialogue, a style common in Gnostic literature. The main part of the writing is a series of questions from the apostles to the risen Lord and his answers. These questions are used as a way to teach Gnostic beliefs about the world's structure, revealed by the "Divine Light." This "Light" is Christ, the heavenly redeemer.

### Pilate, Acts of

This document is an apocryphal gospel about the passion of Jesus, which was finalized by the middle of the fourth century AD. The first Christian writer to mention the Acts of Pilate was Epiphanius. He was an ecclesiastical heresy hunter, who wrote a lengthy denunciation of various heresies in AD 375, in which he definitely mentioned the Acts of Pilate (*Heresies* 50\.1\). Much earlier, Justin Martyr had mentioned Pilate’s report to Tiberius regarding the trial of Jesus (*I Apology* 35; 48\). Near the end of the second century AD, Tertullian mentioned a report from Pilate to Emperor Tiberius as well. However, the contents Justin Martyr and Tertullian each describe do not correspond to the content of the Acts of Pilate. While an earlier version of the Acts of Pilate might have existed before the fourth century AD, the current version dates to the middle of the fourth century AD. Its original language was Greek, and it was translated into Latin, Coptic, and Armenian. 

Eusebius, the famous fourth\-century church historian and bishop of Caesarea, condemns what he regarded as a blasphemous account of Pilate. It was probably a pagan document that sought to defame Christ (*Historia Ecclesiastica*, 1\.9\.3; 9\.5\.1\). The author of the Christian "Acts of Pilate" probably wrote it to oppose the blasphemous account which Eusebius condemned.

The final version of the Acts of Pilate, which includes redactions and additions, has two main sections:

1. The first section claims to be an account by the Pharisee Nicodemus about the events around Jesus's suffering, translated from Hebrew into Greek (chapters 1–16\).
2. The second section, also known as “Christ’s Descent into Hell,” vividly describes Christ going into Hadesto free the righteous who are dead (chapters 17–27\). This is a creative story based on [1 Peter 3:19](https://ref.ly/1Pet3:19). This passage is also where the Apostle's Creed took the phrase “he descended into hell” from. After the 14th century AD, the entire work was expanded and called the "Gospel of Nicodemus" due to the fact that Nicodemus had a key role in it.

In the prologue to the Acts of Pilate, a Roman soldier named Ananias claims he found the Acts of Pilate in Hebrew and translated the document into Greek in the 18th year of Emperor Flavius Theodosius's rule (AD 425\). 

Here is a summary of the entire document: 

In the 15th year of Tiberius Caesar (AD 29\), Nicodemus wrote about events that happened around the passion, death, and resurrection of Jesus. The Jewish high priests accused Jesus of religious crimes before Pilate and requested a trial. Although reluctant, Pilate summoned Jesus in a respectful manner. When Jesus arrived, the Roman standards bowed to him on their own (chapter 1\). 

In chapter 2, the Jewish charges against Jesus included: 

1. That he was born of fornication.
2. That his birth caused the death of Bethlehem's children.
3. That Joseph and Mary fled to Egypt because they were nothing for the people of Israel.

Twelve devout Jews immediately refuted the charge of fornication. They had witnessed Mary and Joseph's engagement. 

An interview between Pilate and Jesus follows in chapter 3\. It is inspired by the content of [John 18:33–38](https://ref.ly/John18:33-John18:38). The Jews accuse Jesus of blasphemy, and Pilate reluctantly turns him over to them (chapter 4\). Nicodemus then speaks in the Jewish council (Sanhedrin), urging them to release Jesus. He argues that if he is not from God, his movement will fail (see [Acts 5:38–39](https://ref.ly/Acts5:38-Acts5:39)). But the Jews oppose him (chapter 5\). 

Three Jews healed by Jesus testify for him (chapter 6\) as well as Bernice, the woman Jesus healed from her bleeding (chapter 7\). The crowd proclaims he is a prophet (chapter 8\). When Pilate offers to release a prisoner, the Jews ask for Barabbas. Pilate then washes his hands of the matter. He has Jesus whipped and crucified with two criminals called Dysmas and Gestas (chapter 9\). 

The crowds mocks Jesus, but one of the two crucified criminals, Gestas, rebukes the other (chapter 10\). The sun darkens to mark Jesus' death. The Jews dismiss this as a normal eclipse (chapter 11\). They seize Joseph of Arimathea and imprison him. However, when they come to execute him, he has disappeared (chapter 12\). The guards report seeing an angel at the tomb but the Jews give them bribes to keep silent (chapter 13\). Three Jews arrive from Galilee: Phineas, a priest; Adas, a teacher; and Angaeus, a Levite. They report they witnessed the great commission and ascension of Jesus on Mount Malich (chapter 14\). 

Nicodemus suggests checking the nearby mountains to see if a spirit took Jesus up only to throw him on the rocks. The Jews find nothing except Joseph of Arimathea in his hometown. They call him to testify before the council. He reveals that Jesus resurrected, appeared to him in prison, and freed him (chapter 15\). After hearing other witnesses, the council decides that if people still remember Jesus after 50 years, the stories must be true (chapter 16\).

The second document starts with Joseph speaking to the council. He claims two brothers rose from the dead at the same time as Jesus. The council calls them to share their stories (chapter 17\). The brothers claimed that while they were in Hades, a great light appeared, and Abraham and Isaiah were filled with joy (chapter 18\). Satan thought he could keep Jesus there (chapter 20\). But when the "King of Glory" arrived, the gates broke down. Satan was made prisoner, and angels bound him and took him away (chapter 22\). Hades blamed Satan and rebuked him for ruining his kingdom (chapter 23\).

The King of Glory (Christ) then led Adam and the righteous dead out of Hades (chapter 24\) to paradise (chapter 25\). The two brothers even saw there the criminal who had been crucified with Jesus and had repented on his cross (chapter 26\). According to the two brothers, the angel Michael had sent them to preach the resurrection of Jesus to all mankind.

The Acts of Pilate is a collection of quotes and references from the four gospels, to which the author has added his own creative and fantastical content. It is essentially a work that aim to defend the truth of Jesus's resurrection against the claims of pagan and Jewish opponents. Unfortunately, its anti\-Semitic tone influenced dramatizations of the events of the Passion Week from the fourth century AD to the end of the Middle Ages.

### Pistis Sophia

This work is preserved as a fourth\-century Coptic manuscript, Codex Askewanus. It represents one of the chief surviving Gnostic works today. It has four chapters and is named after its heroine, Sophia. However, only the first half focuses on her. This section describes how Jesus, during the first 11 years after his resurrection, returned to teach his disciples the highest mystery of all: the Treasury of the Light. 

Jesus went back to the Mount of Olives, where he went up through the *aeons* (spiritual realms). On his journey, he reached the thirteenth *aeon* and found Sophia. She was sad because although she had seen the Treasury of the Light, Authades (the self\-willed) tricked her, showing her a false light. This caused her to fall into the hands of the powers of matter. Despite this, she kept her hope and faith. After 12 prayers, Jesus saved her from Authades and chaos, restoring her to the lower boundary of the thirteenth *aeon*.

The story is told in the form of a dialogue in which Jesus answers his disciples' questions. The theme is thoroughly Gnostic in its view of salvation, which comes by a hidden doctrine bringing illumination.

### Protoevangelium of James

*See* James, Protoevangelium of (above).

### Psalms of Solomon

*See* Solomon, Psalms of (below).

### Resurrection of Christ by Bartholomew, Book of the

*See* Bartholomew, Book of the Resurrection of Christ by (above).

### Reuben, Testament of

*See* Testaments of the Twelve Patriarchs (below).

### Sibylline Oracles

This is a pseudepigraphal writing that originally contained 15 books. Only 12 have survived in late Greek manuscripts. The word *sibyl* comes from the Greek language. The writing claims to be a divine oracle. It warns about an upcoming disaster. Some Jews used this type of writing to help spread their beliefs among non\-Jews.

The first *sibyls* originated during the Maccabean period (165 BC). Other authors added more content progressively. The collection as a whole covers a period that extends to just after the second temple's destruction, about AD 76\. The authors, likely writing in Alexandria, Egypt, emphasized that God is one and sovereign. God controlled all events, whereas pagan deities were useless, unable to do anything. “But God is one, most exalted of all, who has made the heaven, the sun, the stars and the moon. . . . He has constituted man as the Divinely appointed ruler of all. You men . . . be ashamed of making gods” (book 2\). God controls the history of the nations.

The *sibyls* describe the history of 10 generations from the Assyrian kingdom to the destruction of the second temple and the great earthquake (book 4\.47ff.). The third book also contains a section on the devastation and troubles to be experienced before the great judgment. It includes two passages in which the Messiah introduces an era of peace and prosperity for the faithful: “He will raise up his kingdom for all ages over men. For nothing but peace shall come upon the land of the good” (lines 767, 780\). 

The eternal state is reserved for those who are true to God. They will resurrect from the dead in their bodies: “But all who are godly shall live again on earth, when God gives breath and life and grace to them the godly” (book 4\.187–190\). The ungodly will be thrown into hell, “And all who have sinned with deeds of impiety a heap of earth shall cover again, and murky Tartarus and the black recesses of hell” (lines 183–186\).

The authors of the *sibyls* intended to show that the Jewish faith is reasonable. They used the *sibyl* form, which the Greeks introduced and the Romans appreciated. They focused on the God of Israel and opposing worship of false gods (paganism). Yet, they also followed the apocalyptic tradition, unveiling God's secrets of the past and future. They used the *sibyl* as divine oracle, as a literary tool to share their message with the non\-Jewish world.

### Silvanus, Teachings of

The Gnostics attributed this literary work to Silvanus, a companion of the apostles Peter and Paul. People found it in Chenoboskion, Upper Egypt, in 1946\.

### Simeon, Testament of

*See* Testaments of the Twelve Patriarchs (below).

### Slavonic Acts of Peter

*See* Peter, Slavonic Acts of (above).

### Solomon, Psalms of

The Psalms of Solomon are a collection of 18 songs attributed to King Solomon. They are considered pseudepigraphal. The psalms were probably written by one author, who lived during the middle of the first century BC and wrote in Hebrew. The theological perspective of the author is Pharisaic in its views of the law, judgment, and the future of Israel.

These psalms derive their style and phraseology from the biblical book of Psalms. One of these similarities is the emphasis on the contrast between the righteous and the wicked. In the Psalms of Solomon, the Gentiles who defile the holy things of the Lord are wicked (2:3\) and Jews who have fallen into sin are apostate (3:11, 13\).

The sinner is a fool, as opposed to a wise man (see other words of Wisdom Literature). The fool has no concern for the Lord (4:1\). His speech and deeds display his unrighteousness (4:2ff.). He shows that he is a sinner by his lies, judgment of others, false oaths, immorality, lawlessness, and selfish ambitions at the cost of others (cf. 12\). 

The righteous are the wise, who fear the Lord (4:26\). The righteous man is not dismayed by bad dreams or perilous times (6:4–5\). He is provoked with zeal for the Lord’s righteousness, as he witnesses the desecration of the temple and the law (8:28\).

The Lord’s love of him is expressed in discipline, and he responds to the Lord’s rebuke with repentance for his sins. The author compares the righteous to the tree of life in Paradise. They are stable and will not be uprooted (14:2ff.). The wicked, on the other hand, will not be remembered in this life, and God will deal righteously with them by casting them into “Sheol and darkness and destruction” (14:6; 15:10\).

The author sees God as the King who mightily rules over nations (2:34 and following). God is ready to judge his enemies and those who faithfully follow him (2:38 and following; 4:9\). He will vindicate the righteous (2:39\). The Lord shows his care by sustaining creation (5:11–12\) and raising up kings, rulers, and nations (5:13\). In the same way, the author assures readers that God's care extends particularly to poor people and to those who call on him (5:2–3, 13\). He is the hope of the righteous (8:37\).

On the basis of this strong belief that God rules righteously and protects the righteous, there is confidence that God will overcome evil and intervene on behalf of the righteous. The historical context of these psalms is the entrance of Pompey into Jerusalem and his desecration of the temple in 63 BC. There was hope that at the death of Pompey (48 BC, cf. 2:30ff.), the messianic era would begin. 

Therefore, the author reminds God of his covenant with King David and asks God to forgive Israel's past sins. Israel has suffered gentile invasions and control as the result of God’s judgment (17:6\). Since Pompey had died, the author prayed for the restoration of the theocracy under a Davidic king—“Behold, O Lord, and raise up unto them their king, the son of David. All the time in the which Thou seest, O God, that he may reign over Israel Thy servant” (17:23\). By means of the Davidic Messiah, the land will be purged of sinners, godless nations, and the righteous will be sanctified.

The Messiah will only rule over the righteous remnant. When God restores them to the land, he will divide them into the 12 tribes. The Davidic Messiah will rule over the tribes and the other nations “in the wisdom of his righteousness” (17:29–31\). The sojourner and the gentile nations will not share in the glory of the kingdom. Instead, they will be servants.

The hope of the glorious future of Israel is the apocalyptic element in the psalms. They arose in a historical context, but they anticipate a radically new future. The psalmist blesses those who will see God's judgment on the nations, Israel's restoration, and the start of the messianic kingdom: “Blessed are those who will be there to see Israel's good fortune when God gathers the tribes. May the Lord quickly show mercy to Israel! The Lord is our king forever and ever” (17:50–51\).

### Solomon, Testament of

The Testament of Solomon is a second\-century BC pseudepigraphal writing. The writing claims that Solomon was the writer of the testament. The text is preserved in Semitic manuscripts and some Greek versions. 

The material is basically Christian with emphasis on the cross and the virgin birth, but it also has Jewish content. The testament tells how King Solomon, using a ring that the archangel Michael gave him, controls demons and make them build his temple. After finishing the temple, Solomon is led into idolatry on account of his lust for a Shunammite girl. The author uses what Solomon did as a warning to his readers about the power of demons and the way they manifest themselves. He also tells me about the power that angels exercise over angels. The story is presented is in the form of a testament, in which Solomon, who is about to die, reflects on his successes and failures, as a legacy to Israel.

### Testaments of the Twelve Patriarchs

These stories are part of the Jewish pseudepigrapha. The work is called a "testament" because it is presented as the speeches of each of Jacob's sons before they died. The testaments begin with the speech of Reuben (Jacob's firstborn) and end with that of Benjamin (Jacob's youngest). Each patriarch gathers his sons to teach lessons about important events in his life. 

During his speech, each patriarch warns against particular vices and attitudes and recommends certain virtues. Their advice and warnings often include insights and predictions about sin and salvation for their children. The account of the patriarch’s life serves as a guide for the future of his descendants. At the end of the speech, each patriarch dies and is buried at Hebron.

The idea of this sort of "testament" is probably inspired from the deathbed farewell speeches that are found in the OT. For instance, in Genesis chapter [49](https://ref.ly/Gen49:1-Gen49:33), Jacob, on his deathbed, gathers his sons to tell them about their future and then dies ([Genesis 49:33](https://ref.ly/Gen49:33)). Likewise, the aged Joshua called the elders, leaders, judges, and officers of Israel to give them instructions before his death ([Joshua 23:2](https://ref.ly/Josh23:2); [24:1](https://ref.ly/Josh24:1)). In the same way, the aged King David also gave advice to Solomon his son, urging him to walk in the ways of God ([1 Kings 2:1–12](https://ref.ly/1Kgs2:1-1Kgs2:12)).

The current versions of the text in Slavonic, Armenian, and Greek are from the second or third century AD. However, much of the content seems to originate from the second or third century BC. Scholars generally agree that an original text in a Semitic language, either Hebrew or Aramaic, was written by one or more authors in the third or second century BC. Later, Christians added sections to this original text. 

Here are examples of these later Christian additions: 

1. Testament of Simeon 6:7\.
2. Testament of Levi 10:2\.
3. Testament of Dan 6:9\.
4. Testament of Naphtali 4:5\.
5. Testament of Asher 7:3–4\.
6. Testament of Joseph 19:11\.
7. Testament of Benjamin 3:8; 9:2–4\.

It seems that Jewish and Christian writers revised the testaments over the centuries. Thus, we have a Jewish document from about the third century BC that has undergone both Jewish and Christian redactions over a long period of time. These testaments became very popular in the tenth century, especially the prophecies of the patriarchs and their secret knowledge.

Below is a summary of each testament of the patriarchs. The excerpts are from R. H. Charles’s *Pseudepigrapha*, pages 282–367\.

Reuben

The remorseful recollection of the incident in which Reuben defiled his father's bed plays a central role in his testament. This happened when he had sexual relations with his father's concubine, Bilhah, while she was drunk. Reuben has strong opinions about what he sees as negative traits in women. He warns his sons to be cautious in their relationships with women. 

His comments probably reflect the negative impact this incident had on his relationship to his father Jacob. Reuben predicts that in the future, his sons will be jealous of Levi's sons but would not be able to overcome them. He advises his descendants to respect and love each other and to be truthful to their neighbors. Reuben is buried at Hebron.

Simeon

The patriarch Simeon is presented as a strong warrior. In the biblical story of Joseph being sold into slavery, Simeon admits he wanted to kill Joseph instead of selling him ([Genesis 37:25–28](https://ref.ly/Gen37:25-Gen37:28)). As punishment, God withered his right hand for seven days. Simeon warns his sons against envy, deceit, and fornication. He predicts that they will attempt to harm the sons of Levi but prophesies that the sons of Levi will remain superior.

Simeon looks forward to a period of bliss when the "Most High" would be blessed (6:4–7a). Verse 7b is a Christian addition that says: "Because God has taken a body, eaten with men, and saved men." Simeon tells his sons that they should obey the descendants of Levi and Judah. This is because salvation will come from them. He predicts a high priest will come from Levi and a king from Judah's family line. Simeon ends by predicting that God will save all Gentiles and Israel. The part about the Gentiles is probably a Christian addition as well.

Levi

Levi's Testament consists of dreams that he relates to his sons. He predicts that from his descendants and those of Judah the Lord would “appear among men” to save every race of men (2:11\). The descendants of Levi would be “as the sun to all the seed of Israel” (4:3b). In one dream, he sees that his sons will receive the blessings of the priesthood (8:2–3\). Levi also predicts that a king from Judah will establish a new priesthood ministering to both Jews and Gentiles.

Chapter ten includes a Christian addition stating that because of ungodliness and transgression, Levi's sons would wrong "the Savior of the world, Christ" (10:2\). As a result, they would be scattered worldwide. Chapter thirteen focuses on wisdom and the importance of following the law. Chapter 16 introduces an eschatological prediction that the sons of Levi would go astray for 70 weeks.

The next chapter details these 70 weeks, in which there will be a priesthood for each jubilee. The first priesthood will be great, and the priest’s relationship to God will be such that God will be addressed as father. The second priesthood will "be conceived in the sorrow of beloved ones" but will be glorified by all (17:3\). The following five priesthoods will be characterized by sorrow, pain, hatred, and darkness.

Eventually, a new priest will bring peace to all the earth (18:4\). Sin will end, as this new priest will have a spirit of understanding and sanctification resting upon him (18:9\). The testament closes with an admonition to choose either the law of the Lord or the work of Beliar (variant of Belial). The sons of Levi pledge themselves to the law, and following his death, they bury him at Hebron.

Judah

At the beginning of the testament, Judah tells his descendants that he had been promised by his father that he would be king. “And it came to pass, when I became a man, that my father blessed me, saying, You shall be a king, prospering in all things” (1:6\). Judah recalls his youth and his ability to conquer wild animals. He followed the commandments and resisted wrong sexual desire. He predicted his descendants would do what is evil because of the love of money and the enticement of beautiful women (chapter 17\). 

In chapter 21, Judah predicts that the Lord will give a kingdom to his descendants and the priesthood to Levi's sons. Chapter 24 includes a Christian addition about the Christ. It predicts that from the star of Jacob one will arise that will be without sin and from it a rod of righteousness will grow to the Gentiles (24:6\). The testament concludes with eschatological hope for the future when “they who are poor for the Lord’s sake shall be made rich and they who are put to death for the Lord’s sake shall awake to life” (25:4\). Judah dies and is buried at Hebron.

Issachar

The last words of this patriarch are unique because it pictures Issachar as "upright" and without transgressions. This contrasts with many of his brothers. He predicts the priesthood will come from Levi, and kingship will come from Judah's family line. In chapter 6, Issachar predicts his children will follow *Beliar*. However, if they recognize God's mercy and follow Issachar's example, "every spirit of Beliar will flee from them." His final request was to be buried at Hebron with his ancestors.

Zebulun 

The patriarch Zebulun starts his testament by calling himself a "good gift" to his parents. Like Issachar, he says he is not aware of sinning, except in thought. If he has done any wrong, it is only because of ignorance. Zebulun claims he did not support his brothers' actions against Joseph. He would have told his father about Joseph's situation, but the brothers agreed that they would kill anyone who revealed the secret (1:6\). 

In 1:7, he states that without his intervention, the brothers would have killed Joseph. The brothers were so suspicious of Zebulun that they watched him until they sold Joseph. Chapter 5, verse 3 recalls a familiar theme found in the NT and among the Jewish rabbis (religious teachers with authority): "Have compassion in your hearts, my children, because as a man does to his neighbor, so will the Lord do to him." 

Zebulun believes that this lesson must demonstrated in practical terms. The sons of the other brothers became sick and died because of their actions against Joseph. This was "because they showed no mercy in their hearts" (5:5\). Zebulun's sons remained healthy. The patriarch continues to teach wisdom by declaring that a man will receive mercy from the Lord to the same extent that this man has shown mercy to his neighbor.

Zebulun predicts that Israel would divide into two kingdoms and that both would end up being conquered by the Gentiles. However, the people will repent and the Lord will return them to their land and Jerusalem (9:8\). In chapter 10, Zebulun predicts that after his death, he will "arise as a ruler among his sons" (10:2\). He promises rewards for those who follow the laws and punishment for the ungodly. Zebulun dies at the end of his testament and is buried in Hebron.

Dan

The patriarch Dan regrets that he was jealous of Joseph. He indicates that he was controlled by the spirit of *Beliar*. He reveals that he wanted to kill Joseph so that he could have the love of his father. Dan warns against the spirits of lying and anger, urging his descendants to love truth and long\-suffering. He advises them to follow the commandments and to "love the Lord through all your life and one another with a true heart" (5:3\).

Dan predicts that his sons will “in the last days” depart from the Lord and thus provoke the anger of the sons of Levi. They will also fight against the sons of Judah. His sons will not defeat the sons of Levi and Judah because an angel of the Lord will guide them. 

Dan mentions reading in the book of Enoch that Satan and all the spirits of wickedness will lead cause the sons of Levi, Judah, and Dan to sin. They will become captives and suffer the plagues of Egypt and all the evils of the Gentiles. However, when they return to the Lord, they will receive mercy and peace. 

Dan predicts that someone will arise from the tribes of Judah and Levi whom he calls "the salvation of the Lord." The “one arising” would make war against Beliar and execute an “everlasting vengeance” against their enemies (5:10\). Dan's final warning is to be on guard against Satan and his spirits and to draw near to God and the angel "that intercedes for you" (6:2\). 

The last section urges Dan's sons to teach their children everything they have learned so that "the savior of the Gentiles may receive" them. This is followed by a Christian polemic about the savior being true, long\-suffering, meek and lowly (6:9\). When Dan dies, they bury him near Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob.

Naphtali

According to the testament, Naphtali is 130 years old when he gives his last words. He is described as being in good health, but the morning after a feast, he realizes he will die. He then gathers his sons around him. Naphtali has a very strong sense of order that contributes to the makeup and actions of man as well as the universe. 

For him, the "Gentile problem" is that they abandoned the Lord. They changed their order to obey "stocks and stones." This change in order was the problem in Sodom and also caused the great flood of Noah's time.

Naphtali reads from the book of Enoch that his sons will depart from the Lord and walk “according to all lawlessness of the Gentiles” (4:1\). He predicts that his descendants will be taken captive because of their sins and afterward a “few” will return to the Lord. Then God will bring them back to their land. After their return to the land, his sons will forget the Lord and "become ungodly" and they will be scattered across the earth. They will stay this way until the compassion of the Lord comes and a man working righteousness and mercy comes to them.

Naphtali describes two dreams he had at age 40\. In the first dream, he saw the sun and moon stand still. Isaac told his grandsons to run and take hold of the sun and moon, each according to his strength. Levi took hold of the sun, and Judah seized the moon. Both of them were lifted up with the sun and moon. A bull with two large horns and eagle wings appears. The other sons tried to seize the bull but failed. However, Joseph came and took hold of the bull and ascended “up with him on high” (5:7\). Then Naphtali predicts that the Assyrians, Medes, Persians, Chaldeans, and Syrians will take the 12 tribes of Israel into captivity. 

In the other dream, he saw a ship sailing on the sea of Jamnia without sailors or a pilot. The ship had the words "The ship of Jacob" written on it (6:2\). Jacob and his sons were on the ship. When a storm came, Jacob left them. The ship eventually breaks apart because of the storm. Joseph sails away in a small boat, while the other brothers each hang on to one of nine pieces of wood, with Levi and Judah sharing one. Levi's prayers apparently help all the brothers reach the shore safely. When Naphtali tells his father these dreams, Jacob reveals to him that all these events must be fulfilled.

Naphtali urges his sons to stay united to Levi and Judah because through them, “shall salvation arise to Israel” (8:2\). Through Levi and Judah, righteous people from other nations will also be gathered. Naphtali dies and is buried in Hebron.

Gad

The patriarch Gad is represented as having hated Joseph. This was because Joseph had told his father that Gad and some of his other brothers were eating from the best of the flocks while tending them. In his testament, Gad confesses this sin of hatred to his sons. He warns them against harboring hatred because it only brings anguish: “For as love would quicken even the dead and would call back them that are condemned to die, so hatred would slay the living and those that had sinned venially it would not suffer to live” (4:6\).

Repentance gives knowledge to the soul and leads the mind to salvation. Gad encourages his sons to honor the lineage of Levi and Judah, with whom is found the salvation of Israel. He predicts that his sons will walk in all wickedness and corruption. The testament ends on a somewhat pessimistic note. Gad asks to be buried near his fathers and is buried at Hebron.

Asher

Asher is very conscious of good and evil spirits and knows that each person must choose between the two. The patriarch predicts that his descendants will act in an ungodly way and will not listen to the law of God. As a result, they will be delivered into the hands of their enemies and will be scattered. They remain so until the “Most High” visits the earth “coming Himself \[as man with men eating and drinking] . . . he shall save Israel and all the Gentiles” (7:3–4\). This Christian interpolation is followed by a declaration that the Lord will gather them because of his mercy and for the sake of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob. When Asher dies, he is buried at Hebron.

Joseph

Joseph calls himself the “beloved of Israel” (1:2\). Although he has seen envy and death, he did not go astray. In his testament, he explains the ordeal of being sold into slavery. In chapter 1, the verses also follow the same parallel structure: the first half of each verse describes Joseph's plight, while the second half exalts how the Lord helped him. For instance: “I was sold into slavery, and the Lord of all made me free: I was taken into captivity, and his strong hand succored me. I was beset with hunger and the Lord himself nourished me” (1:5\). 

Joseph details his experiences in Egypt. Eight chapters are devoted to describing how the Egyptian woman tempted him. However, Joseph resisted her advances and the Lord rewarded him for his convictions. He urges his sons to have the fear of the Lord in all their works because whoever does the law of the Lord will be loved by him. This is the key to success. Joseph encourages his children to do good to anyone who would do evil to them and to pray for their enemies. He gives his own attitude toward his brothers as example.

Joseph also urges his sons to observe the commandments of the Lord and to honor Levi and Judah for “the Lamb of God, who takes away the sin of the world, who saves all the Gentiles and Israel” (19:11\) will arise from them. He predicts that Israel will be enslaved in Egypt but also rescued. He directs his sons to take his bones with them when they leave Egypt. The testament concludes by indicating that after their return from Egypt, the Israelites buried the bones of Joseph at Hebron.

Benjamin

The last patriarch gives his testament when he is 125 years old. He encourages his children to love the Lord and keep his commandments. He urges them to follow the goodness of Joseph, for he did not want his brothers’ actions against him to be counted as sin. Benjamin predicts that, in Joseph will be fulfilled the prophecy “concerning the Lamb of God and Savior of the world, and that a blameless one shall be delivered up for lawless men, and a sinless one shall die for ungodly men in the blood of the covenant, for the salvation of the Gentiles and of Israel and shall destroy Beliar and his servants” (3:8\). The fact that this testament presents Joseph as someone who suffered in innocence and had no cause for remorse provided good opportunity for Christian interpolation and polemic. In the same way, the Christian Messiah suffered innocently in order to save ungodly men.

Benjamin believed that there were evildoers among his sons. Having read in the book of Enoch, he predicts that they will commit “fornication with the fornication of Sodom” and only a few will survive (9:1\). There would be a remnant from each tribe as the 12 tribes and the Gentiles would gather at the last temple. Their salvation would be a result of the “Most High” sending his only “begotten prophet” (9:2\). He would be lifted up upon a tree and the veil of the temple would be rent. Then the Spirit of God would be passed on to the Gentiles. Benjamin admonishes his sons that if they walk in holiness according to the commandments of the Lord, all of Israel will be gathered to the Lord. When Benjamin dies, he is buried at Hebron.

From this brief summary of each testament, one can see that they contain additions from both Jews and Christians that go beyond mere interpolation. The final text reflects such characteristics as two messiahs, a double love commandment, ethical and theological teachings, as well as salvation for the Gentiles. However, it is most difficult to place these features within a particular time period or even religion.

### Thaddeus, Acts of

This is a sixth\-century version and extension of the fifth\-century Syriac Doctrina Addaei, or Legend of Abgar. The Legend claimed to be an exchange of letters between Abgar, king of Edessa (AD 9–46\), and Jesus. This exchange results in the sending of Thaddeus, one of Jesus’ apostles, to Edessa. While there, he performs numerous miracles including the healing of Abgar. In the Acts, Abgar is healed when Ananias, his messenger, returns before Thaddeus arrives. The Acts focuses on the activity of Thaddeus in establishing the church in Edessa.

### Thecla, Acts of Paul and

*See* Paul and Thecla, Acts of (above).

### Thomas, Acts of

The Acts of Thomas is one of a number of "acts" of the apostles that have three common characteristics: 

1. They narrate the propagation of the Gospel around the ancient world.
2. They promote the deeds and words of one of the apostles.

They inevitably chronicle that apostle’s martyrdom. 

The oldest of these “acts narratives” are those of Paul, John, Andrew, Peter, and Thomas. The Acts of Thomas, like the others, is a blend of Christian piety, popular Hellenistic romances of the day, and Jewish haggadic\-type moralistic teachings.

Scholarly study of the Acts of Thomas suggests that it was probably written at the beginning of the third century AD. It was definitely written in Syriac first, probably by someone who had a strong leaning toward the Gnostic heresy. It became widely popular among Gnostics, Manichaeans, and orthodox churches. It was so popular that it was quickly translated from the original Syriac into Arabic, Armenian, and Greek (with several Greek translations). From these varied Greek versions, Coptic, Latin, and Ethiopic translations were made. Significant portions of the Coptic version were in turn translated back into Arabic, Ethiopic, and Greek. This has produced a most confusing textual tradition. Only one full early Syriac text survives, and it is considered less reliable than some of the extant Greek translations.

In the critical English edition of the Acts of Thomas, published by A. F. J. Klijn in 1962, the narrative is divided into the traditional acts ("praxeis"). There are 13 of these distinct stories across the 170 sequential chapters of the entire book. The book concludes with the martyrdom of the apostle. For instance, the first act and first chapters are about the distribution of territories to evangelize among the apostles.

The stories contain various liturgical pieces, sermon fragments, and hymns. This includes two particularly famous hymns in the early church: the “Song of the Bride” (act 1\) and the “Song of the Pearl” (act 9\). The first six acts are not woven together by any particular theme. They record that Thomas boarded a ship to go to India (act 3\). This would imply that his ministry was in the south of India. Yet the story describes ministry to the north Indian king, Gundaphoro (act 4\), while acts 7 through 13 and the martyrdom take place in the southern Indian kingdom of Mazdai. Chapters 7 through 13 were obviously written by one hand. 

It is probable that the first six acts represent earlier stories that the writer of the last seven acts and the martyrdom added to his work. This document is the first\-known mention of the traditions that Thomas ministered in India, was martyred there, and that his bones were returned to Edessa. The Acts of Thomas are written, as are all the apocryphal acts of the apostles, on the assumption that the world was divided into areas that each of the apostles were responsible to evangelize. Thomas was allotted India.

Thomas is called Judas Thomas throughout these acts. This follows the Syrian style of naming that apostle. Thomas is described as the twin of Jesus (the Didymus of the NT). He receives special divine revelations and is Jesus incarnate in the flesh again (in chapters 10, 11, 39, 47, and 48 of the Acts). Many historians think these are clear indications of Gnostic thought. Others think that such ideas are attempts to adapt Jesus to human perception and identification with his apostles. These are frequent features in early Christian literature. There is widespread agreement that Gnostic or Manichee tendencies were gradually edited out of Greek and Latin texts by orthodox copyists.

One quickly gets a sense of how this story works. At the beginning of the Acts of Thomas, the apostle refuses to go to India. He is then sold as a slave. This parallels the coming of Christ in the form of a slave to redeem man. Thomas reaches India as a carpenter (like Jesus) and a builder of homes. He is a groomsman in a wedding. There he performs such miracles that the flute player is convinced that Thomas is an as apostle of God. As a result, the king asks Thomas to pray for his daughter. Thomas greatly emphasizes purity in his teaching, which usually involves sexual abstinence as well. Finally, many convert to the Christian faith, including the king. They form an assembly of believers in Sandaruk.

In the second act, king Gundophor gives Thomas a large sum of money to build a palace. After surprising the king by tracing the palace on the ground in winter, Thomas builds him a palace in heaven by giving the money to the poor. The king imprisons and decides to kill Thomas because he believed that the apostle had deceived him. However, Gad, the king’s brother, dies and goes to heaven where he sees the palace and desires to buy it. Gad is then reunited with his body and tries to buy the palace from Gundophor. The king learns that he cannot sell it. He releases Thomas from prison, and advises Gad to arrange to have his own palace built in heaven. Thomas gives a great doxology (chapter 25 of act 2\), and the two brothers who have come to believe through all of this want to be baptized.

In these miracle stories and in the teachings, there seems to be echoes of all NT books. However, there are relatively few direct quotations. Favorite miracle passages such as Balaam’s talking donkey and Peter’s release from prison are reexperienced in Thomas’s life with much embellishment. The talking donkey enters a home and casts out a demon at Thomas’s command. The apostle causes great consternation by repeatedly passing in and out of the securely closed prison. Miracles, sufferings, and conversions like these constitute the content of acts 3 through 13 and continue to the climax of Judas Thomas’s ministry. His martyrdom occurs at the hands of four soldiers with spears who have been ordered by the king of Mazdai to execute him (chapter 168\). He thereafter appears to his followers, who have Thomas’s bones removed to Edessa. Meantime, the son of the king of Mazdai becomes sick to the point of death. Desperate, the king goes to Thomas’s tomb, thinking to find a relic he could use to heal his son. When he finds out that the apostle's body is gone, he uses the very dust upon which Judas Thomas’s body rested, and his son is healed. As a result, the king becomes a believer and joins the community of believers.

### Thomas, Gospel of

This is a noncanonical and heretical gospel of Gnostic origin that probably dates from the second or third century AD. It is one of a large number of similar writings that were popular among early religious sects. This includes the Marcosians, which were a second\-century group that built an elaborate sacramental system around numbers. The Manicheans were another such group. They believed in a third\-century dualistic heresy based on the primeval conflict between light and darkness. In fact, Cyril of Jerusalem, who died in AD 386, said that the Gospel of Thomas was written by “one of those wicked disciples of Mani” (the founder of Manichaeism). Along with the Protoevangelium of James, it is one of the oldest and most widely known of the more than 50 apocryphal gospels circulating among churches during the period of their early growth and expansion.

This Gospel of Thomas is sometimes referred to as an “infancy gospel.” It should not be confused with the Coptic version that was unearthed in 1945 near Nag Hammadi in Upper Egypt. The latter is a collection of 114 “sayings of Jesus,” which shed a great deal of light on the influence of Gnosticism on Egyptian Christianity. They claim to be the “secret words” of Jesus transmitted by “Didymos Judas Thomas.” The Gospel of Thomas, with which this article deals, recounts a series of childhood miracles of Jesus and is preserved for us in four versions: two in Greek (one quite a bit longer than the other), one in Latin, and one in Syriac.

The Gospel of Thomas was apparently known as early as Hippolytus (AD 155–235\). He quotes it as saying, “He who seeks me will find me in children from seven years old; for there will I, who am hidden in the fourteenth aeon, be found.” Hippolytus claimed that it was used by the Naasenes, a Gnostic sect that worshiped the serpent. They used the Gospel of Thomas in support of their doctrine of the nature of the inward man. The quotation above is not found in the surviving versions. This is understandable because there is evidence from the Stichometry of Nicephorus (possibly fourth century) that an earlier version was more than twice longer. Both Origen (c. AD 185–254\) and Eusebius (c. AD 260–340\) knew the Gospel of Thomas. Eusebius considered it heretical and said it should be “rejected as altogether absurd and impious” (*Historia Ecclesiastica* 3\.25\).

The stories in the Gospel of Thomas emphasize the miraculous power and supernatural wisdom of the boy Jesus. Some scholars think they were originally fabricated by orthodox Christians to oppose the Gnostic heresy that the “supernatural Christ” first came upon Jesus at the time of his baptism. It is much more likely, however, that they owe their origin to people’s curiosity about what Jesus was like when he was a boy. Some of these tales may have been inspired by pagan sources.

There are only three or four miracles in this stories that can be considered to do something beneficial. All the other miracles attributed to Jesus in these stories are destructive. For example, a certain child spoiled some pools made by Jesus. The boy Jesus curses the other boy who totally withers up. Another boy who provoked Jesus by running into him “immediately . . . fell down and died.” A teacher who struck Jesus on the head was straightway cursed and fell to the ground. The French writer Renan referred to the "Jesus" of the Gospel of Thomas as “a vicious little guttersnipe.”

Throughout the gospel, Jesus is presented as infinitely wise. He ridicules his teacher Zacchaeus saying, “You hypocrite, first, if you know it, teach the Alpha, and then we will believe you concerning the Beta.” After Zacchaeus berates himself for being so inferior to the one he intended to take as a disciple, Jesus laughs and announces, “I am come from above that I may curse them.” The text continues, “And no man after that dared to provoke him, lest he should curse him, and he should be maimed.”

Other miracles include:

* making 12 live sparrows out of clay
* smiting his accusers with blindness
* raising a child from the dead
* healing a foot cut in two by an ax
* carrying water in a cloth garment
* reaping an enormous harvest from one kernel of wheat
* stretching a piece of wood to its proper length
* healing his brother James who had been bitten by a viper while gathering firewood

There are even more miracle stories in the longer Latin version.

It comes as no surprise that the orthodox church has always rejected the apocryphal Gospel of Thomas from its canon of sacred scripture. It is, however, quoted in other later gospels of the same sort. For example, the Gospel of Pseudo\-Matthew from chapter 18 on is based upon the Gospel of Thomas. Along with other apocryphal materials, it has exercised a significant influence on Christian art and literature, especially from the tenth century forward. The account of Jesus making the 12 sparrows from clay is even narrated in the Koran.

### Truth, Gospel of

Around 1945, a group of Egyptian peasant farmers near modern Nag Hammadi inadvertently dug into a grave of the ancient village known as Shenesit\-Chenoboskion. They discovered a jar containing 13 books. Nine of these were largely complete and 15 were fragments of works. This discovery was the library of an ancient Gnostic sect. It contained all or parts of 51 different Gnostic writings. Only two of these had been available to scholars for study before. This collection is now called the Nag Hammadi or Chenoboskion texts. It was the first discovery of original Gnostic literature in the modern period. All are Coptic translations of earlier Greek originals.

Codex I is titled the Jung Codex because it now is owned by the Jung Institute in Vienna. It is unique among the 13 works because it is written in Sub\-Achimimic Coptic. The rest of the works are written in the more usual Sahidic Coptic. This codex contains five works, two of which are the enormously controversial Gospel of Thomas and the Gospel of Truth.

The Gospel of Truth has no heading. It draws its title from its first line of the text. It mentions no author nor addressee. In fact, it is not a gospel at all, but rather a treatise that expresses Valentinian Gnosticism at its very earliest stage. The majority of scholars think that Valentinus himself is the author for two reasons: 

1. The Gospel of Truth lacks all later\-Valentinian mythological development.
2. It is stated simply and in almost orthodox Christian thought forms.

However, no final proof of this has been discovered as yet. If Valentinus himself did not write this document, then it had to be someone in the immediate circle of his initial disciples.

Valentinus was born in Egypt around AD 100 to 110\. He received a thorough education at Alexandria and became a Christian. He taught first in Egypt before moving to Rome around AD 136, where he stayed until 154 or 155\. Tertullian, in his work against heresy, seems to imply that Valentinus was twice expelled from the Roman church. He states that he was a brilliant and eloquent man who had hopes of becoming a bishop in Rome at one time. 

Valentinus attracted able followers who later expanded his teachings almost beyond recognition. By the time he left Rome sometime after 154 or 155, he had definitely broken away from orthodoxy. He was now teaching a form of Gnostic heresy. The Gospel of Truth is the product of what he taught. A later surviving source claims Valentinus taught subsequently in Cyprus. There is no further mention of what he did or of what happened to him afterwards.

Irenaeus wrote that the Gospel of Truth is not a gospel because it is unlike the four Gospels (*Against Heresies* 3\.2\.9\). Irenaeus was certainly correct, since the work is not a narrative like the biblical Gospels. The Gospel of Truth does not contain any story about Jesus, any place name of any type, any date, or any mention of any person other than Jesus, who is only mentioned five times.

More than 60 times, this brief work mentions the notions of knowledge (Gnosis) and the need to have knowledge. This knowledge is born from within as the soul returns to itself, finding there what the Deity deposited in it. It may even find there the residue of Deity still entrapped within the soul. Thus, whoever has Gnosis has simply taken what is his. The individual can therefore know where he is from and where he is bound. 

In this "gospel," Christ’s role is to present the “Book of the Living” or the “Living Book.” “Book” is not understood as the Gospel proclamation of the life and teachings of Jesus. It is rather the primordial gospel or truth that existed before creation. It was error and ignorance that caused rebellion against the Savior and his crucifixion to the tree. 

Although it is not explicitly stated, the Gnostic understanding that it was also divine error and ignorance out of which matter emerged or was created is implied. Salvation for living beings entrapped in this matter comes with returning to flawless Deity. The path of this return is Gnosis (knowledge). The Pleroma, the fullness of the Deity, went out into the depths of matter in search of the elect among beings by way of Jesus and the cross.

While these traits of Gnosticism are clear, this gospel is much closer to orthodoxy than most Gnostic Chenoboskion writings, because it mentions only one Son of God, not several "emanations." It does not split Jesus into a physical Jesus and a divine Christ. Most strikingly, Sophia, the usual central character in the Gnostic cosmic drama, does not appear at all. It is for these reasons among others that the Gospel of Truth is placed very close to Valentinus’s break with orthodoxy.

The Gospel of Truth has assumed some degree of importance in NT studies beyond that warranted by its heretical content, because it everywhere assumes our full NT canon. By some scholars’ counts, there are no less than 83 places where the Gospel of Truth echoes NT canonical books—in spite of the fact that it does not cite a single saying of Jesus directly. Most particularly, it relies heavily on the book of Revelation and on the Epistle to the Hebrews.

### Virgin, Assumption of

This is a widely circulated legend dealing with the death and translation of the Virgin Mary into heaven. None of the many versions that have survived dates earlier than the fourth century. Most go back to Egypt. In the Coptic versions, Jesus himself appears to Mary before the apostles depart on their missionary labors. Jesus announces her coming death and translation. In the other version, it is an angel who makes the announcement. Mary requests the presence of all the apostles, who are miraculously brought on the clouds. Mary is transfigured, and many healings result from contact with her dead body. She is transported to heaven by Jesus shortly after her death.

There was renewed interest in this legend when the Roman Catholic Church made “The Assumption of the Blessed Virgin” part of their official doctrine in 1950\.

### Virgin, Life of

There are a number of accounts of the early life and existence of the Virgin Mary. Most of them come to us through Coptic texts. They tell of the birth of Mary to Joachim (also called Cleopas) and Anna, who had been taunted by friends for having no children. Mary was born after a vision of a white dove. In some accounts, Mary was dedicated to the Lord and then committed to the care of a man, Joseph. While she was weaving on the veil of the temple, angels would come to minister to her. The annunciation by Gabriel is described at great length, including the birth of Jesus, while Joseph is searching for a midwife, Salome. Other accounts go on to describe tender scenes between Mary and the child Jesus. In some of these versions, there is a reckless identification of the Virgin Mary with all of the other women named Mary in the Gospels.

### Zebulun, Testament of

*See* Testaments of the Twelve Patriarchs (above).

* **Associated Passages:** GEN 3:15; GEN 41:45; GEN 49:33; NUM 11:26; JOS 23:2; JOS 24:1; DAN 10:13; MAT 13:55; LUK 1:1; ACT 13:13; ROM 16:3; 2CO 2:4; 2CO 12:4; 2TI 3:11; 2TI 4:19; 1PE 3:19; JUD 1:9; REV 1:1; 2ES 7:50; 2ES 7:113; 2ES 8:1; DEU 32:48–DEU 32:50; 2ES 14:1–2ES 14:6; 2ES 14:42–2ES 14:46; JER 36:4–JER 36:8; GEN 32:22–GEN 32:29; LEV 25:8–LEV 25:12; DEU 34:5–DEU 34:7; JER 25:11–JER 25:12; DEU 28:15–DEU 28:68; DEU 30:15–DEU 30:20; DAN 9:4–DAN 9:19; ISA 45:1–ISA 45:6; EZR 1:1–EZR 1:4; EZR 3:1–EZR 3:7; 1CO 7:1–1CO 7:7; 1CO 11:4–1CO 11:6; 1CO 1:12–1CO 1:17; 2CO 12:2–2CO 12:4; JHN 18:33–JHN 18:38; ACT 5:38–ACT 5:39; JOS 23:1–JOS 24:33; 1KI 2:1–1KI 2:12; GEN 49:1–GEN 49:33; GEN 37:25–GEN 37:28
* **Associated Articles:** Bible, Versions of the (Ancient) (ID: `4229@TyndaleBibleDictionary`); Second Book of Esdras (ID: `5142@TyndaleBibleDictionary`); Gnosticism (ID: `5491@TyndaleBibleDictionary`)

