# Aquifer Open Bible Dictionary

**Tyndale Open Bible Dictionary: Aquifer Edition**

This work is an adaptation of *Tyndale Open Bible Dictionary* © 2023 Tyndale House Publishers, licensed under the CC BY\-SA 4\.0 license. The adaptation, *Aquifer Open Bible Dictionary*, was created by BiblioNexus and is also licensed under CC BY\-SA 4\.0\.

This resource has been adapted into multiple languages, including English, Tok Pisin, Arabic (عربي), French (Français), Hindi (हिंदी), Indonesian (Bahasa Indonesia), Portuguese (Português), Russian (Русский), Spanish (Español), Swahili (Kiswahili), and Simplified Chinese (简体中文).



--------------------------------

## Athenobius (id: 3863)

ATHENOBIUS
==========

A friend of King Antiochus VII of Syria ([1 Maccabees 15:28](https://ref.ly/1Macc15:28-1Macc15:36)–[36](https://ref.ly/1Macc15:28-1Macc15:36)). When Antiochus attacked the city of Dor, the high priest Simon Maccabeus tried to help Antiochus by sending him 2,000 soldiers, gold and silver, and military equipment. But Antiochus refused these gifts and broke all agreements with Simon. He then sent a man named Athenobius to Jerusalem. Athenobius told Simon to either give Antiochus control of several strong places or pay a lot of money. If Simon did not do either, Antiochus threatened to attack. Simon offered to pay only one\-tenth of what Antiochus asked for. Athenobius went back to Antiochus very angry about this. As a result, Antiochus sent his general, Cendebeus, to attack Judea ([1 Maccabees 15:38](https://ref.ly/1Macc15:38-1Macc15:41)–[41](https://ref.ly/1Macc15:38-1Macc15:41)).

* **Associated Passages:** 1MA 15:28–1MA 15:36; 1MA 15:38–1MA 15:41

