# Aquifer Open Bible Dictionary

**Tyndale Open Bible Dictionary: Aquifer Edition**

This work is an adaptation of *Tyndale Open Bible Dictionary* © 2023 Tyndale House Publishers, licensed under the CC BY\-SA 4\.0 license. The adaptation, *Aquifer Open Bible Dictionary*, was created by BiblioNexus and is also licensed under CC BY\-SA 4\.0\.

This resource has been adapted into multiple languages, including English, Tok Pisin, Arabic (عربي), French (Français), Hindi (हिंदी), Indonesian (Bahasa Indonesia), Portuguese (Português), Russian (Русский), Spanish (Español), Swahili (Kiswahili), and Simplified Chinese (简体中文).



--------------------------------

## Asmodeus (id: 3824)

ASMODEUS
========

Asmodeus was an evil spirit in the story of Tobit ([Tobit 3:8](https://ref.ly/Tob3:8)). He was a jealous lover. In the story, Asmodeus killed the first seven husbands of Sarah, the only daughter of Raguel from Ecbatana, on their wedding nights. Sarah was very sad until Tobit's son Tobias married her.

The angel Raphael told Tobias how to defeat Asmodeus. Tobias burned the heart and liver of a fish in a ritual. This defeated Asmodeus.

In Hebrew stories about spirits, people often thought of Asmodeus as the king or leader of evil spirits. He might be connected to a Persian spirit called “Aeshma\-daeva.” This spirit was known for causing storms, anger, and strong sexual desire.

*See also* Tobit, Book of.

* **Associated Passages:** TOB 3:8
* **Associated Articles:** Book of Tobit (ID: `8880@TyndaleBibleDictionary`)

