# Aquifer Open Bible Dictionary

**Tyndale Open Bible Dictionary: Aquifer Edition**

This work is an adaptation of *Tyndale Open Bible Dictionary* © 2023 Tyndale House Publishers, licensed under the CC BY\-SA 4\.0 license. The adaptation, *Aquifer Open Bible Dictionary*, was created by BiblioNexus and is also licensed under CC BY\-SA 4\.0\.

This resource has been adapted into multiple languages, including English, Tok Pisin, Arabic (عربي), French (Français), Hindi (हिंदी), Indonesian (Bahasa Indonesia), Portuguese (Português), Russian (Русский), Spanish (Español), Swahili (Kiswahili), and Simplified Chinese (简体中文).



--------------------------------

## Augustus’s Band (id: 3878)

AUGUSTUS’S BAND
===============

A Roman military unit mentioned in [Acts 27:1 (King James Version)](https://ref.ly/Acts27:1). The Berean Standard Bible and other English versions use "Imperial Regiment" instead of "Augustus's Band."

A centurion (an officer in charge of about 100 soldiers) named Julius was a member of Augustus's Band. He was a commander who had custody of the apostle Paul on the way to Rome. The Greek word translated as “band” normally meant a Roman cohort (500 men) or force of two cohorts. 

Some scholars assume that Julius was in command of that unit. It is unusual that an officer who normally commanded a century (100 men) would be in charge of 500 to 1,000 men. It is possible Julius was not in command of the whole unit. Or, it might not have been a regular cohort. It may have been a special group meant to send messages or act as guards.

*See also* Warfare.

* **Associated Passages:** ACT 27:1
* **Associated Articles:** Warfare (ID: `9029@TyndaleBibleDictionary`)

