# Aquifer Open Bible Dictionary

**Tyndale Open Bible Dictionary: Aquifer Edition**

This work is an adaptation of *Tyndale Open Bible Dictionary* © 2023 Tyndale House Publishers, licensed under the CC BY\-SA 4\.0 license. The adaptation, *Aquifer Open Bible Dictionary*, was created by BiblioNexus and is also licensed under CC BY\-SA 4\.0\.

This resource has been adapted into multiple languages, including English, Tok Pisin, Arabic (عربي), French (Français), Hindi (हिंदी), Indonesian (Bahasa Indonesia), Portuguese (Português), Russian (Русский), Spanish (Español), Swahili (Kiswahili), and Simplified Chinese (简体中文).



--------------------------------

## Azazel (id: 3904)

AZAZEL
======

A Hebrew word of unclear origin and meaning. It appears in [Leviticus 16:8, 10, 26](https://ref.ly/Lev16:8,Lev16:10,Lev16:26). Because there is little information about it in the Bible or other sources, scholars have suggested at least four interpretations:

1. Scapegoat: Some believe Azazel refers to the scapegoat used in the Day of Atonement ceremonies. However, this interpretation is unlikely because verses 10 and 26 say the goat was sent to Azazel, not as Azazel.
2. A place where the goat was sent: Many Jewish scholars think Azazel is a place where the goat was sent, possibly a high cliff from which the goat was thrown. Others suggest it means "desert places."
3. Abstract “place” or state of being: Some believe Azazel comes from a Hebrew word meaning “depart” or “remove,” and thus interpret it as “utter removal,” “complete sending away,” or “solitude.” That the goat is sent “into the wilderness as the scapegoat” in [Leviticus 16:10](https://ref.ly/Lev16:10) may be interpreted as “sent to become nothing" or "utterly removed.” This implies the removal of sins: they become “nothing,” since they are totally removed. Sending the goat away would then be a symbolic and ritual act through which God removes one’s past sins.
4. The personal name of a being, most likely a demon, to which the scapegoat was sent: Many modern scholars believe Azazel is a being, likely a demon, to which the scapegoat was sent. The noncanonical book of Enoch describes Azazel as a leader of fallen angels who mislead humans. This interpretation suggests one goat is given to the Lord, and the other to an evil being, possibly Satan.

* **Associated Passages:** LEV 16:8; LEV 16:10; LEV 16:26

