# Aquifer Open Bible Dictionary

**Tyndale Open Bible Dictionary: Aquifer Edition**

This work is an adaptation of *Tyndale Open Bible Dictionary* © 2023 Tyndale House Publishers, licensed under the CC BY\-SA 4\.0 license. The adaptation, *Aquifer Open Bible Dictionary*, was created by BiblioNexus and is also licensed under CC BY\-SA 4\.0\.

This resource has been adapted into multiple languages, including English, Tok Pisin, Arabic (عربي), French (Français), Hindi (हिंदी), Indonesian (Bahasa Indonesia), Portuguese (Português), Russian (Русский), Spanish (Español), Swahili (Kiswahili), and Simplified Chinese (简体中文).



--------------------------------

## Bernice (id: 4137)

BERNICE
=======

The eldest daughter of Herod Agrippa I. She was present when the apostle Paul spoke to her brother, King Agrippa II ([Acts 25:13, 23](https://ref.ly/Acts25:13); [26:30](https://ref.ly/Acts26:30)). 

Bernice, also spelled Berenice, was born around AD 28\. At the age of 13, she married Marcus, the son of a Jewish official named Alexander. After Marcus died, her father arranged for her to marry his elder brother, Herod of Chalcis. Bernice had two sons, Bernicianus and Hyrcanus, before her second husband died in AD 48\. When her relationship with her brother, Agrippa II, became closer, rumors of incest began to spread. To counter these rumors, Bernice convinced Polemo, the king of Cilicia, to marry her, but she left him soon after.

In AD 66, Bernice courageously but unsuccessfully tried to stop the Roman procurator Gessius Florus from plundering the temple in Jerusalem. She stood by her brother’s side when he warned the people against going to war. When the war began that same year, Jewish rebels burned down her palace and her brother's.

* **Associated Passages:** ACT 25:13; ACT 25:23; ACT 26:30

