# Aquifer Open Bible Dictionary

**Tyndale Open Bible Dictionary: Aquifer Edition**

This work is an adaptation of *Tyndale Open Bible Dictionary* © 2023 Tyndale House Publishers, licensed under the CC BY\-SA 4\.0 license. The adaptation, *Aquifer Open Bible Dictionary*, was created by BiblioNexus and is also licensed under CC BY\-SA 4\.0\.

This resource has been adapted into multiple languages, including English, Tok Pisin, Arabic (عربي), French (Français), Hindi (हिंदी), Indonesian (Bahasa Indonesia), Portuguese (Português), Russian (Русский), Spanish (Español), Swahili (Kiswahili), and Simplified Chinese (简体中文).



--------------------------------

## Beetle (id: 4075)

BEETLE
======

Beetles are insects that have chewing mouthparts and two pairs of wings. Their front wings are hard, while their back wings are soft and can be folded. Beetles have different eating habits. Some beetles eat meat, while others mainly eat plants. Some beetles live in water. Some can cause skin blisters. Others can damage fabrics or crops. Some beetles are helpful because they eat harmful insects.

In ancient Egypt, the beetle, or sacred scarab, was an important symbol. It represented the sun god Ra. The Egyptians made scarab seals and amulets, which were very popular items.

The word "beetle" is used in the King James Version of the Bible as a translation for "cricket" in [Leviticus 11:22](https://ref.ly/Lev11:22). 

*See also* Cricket.

* **Associated Passages:** LEV 11:22
* **Associated Articles:** Cricket (ID: `4692@TyndaleBibleDictionary`)

