# Aquifer Open Bible Dictionary

**Tyndale Open Bible Dictionary: Aquifer Edition**

This work is an adaptation of *Tyndale Open Bible Dictionary* © 2023 Tyndale House Publishers, licensed under the CC BY\-SA 4\.0 license. The adaptation, *Aquifer Open Bible Dictionary*, was created by BiblioNexus and is also licensed under CC BY\-SA 4\.0\.

This resource has been adapted into multiple languages, including English, Tok Pisin, Arabic (عربي), French (Français), Hindi (हिंदी), Indonesian (Bahasa Indonesia), Portuguese (Português), Russian (Русский), Spanish (Español), Swahili (Kiswahili), and Simplified Chinese (简体中文).



--------------------------------

## Bitumen (id: 4263)

BITUMEN
=======

A naturally occurring substance similar to asphalt, pitch, or tar. It is a thick, sticky substance found naturally in the ground. People in ancient times used it like a type of glue or sealant.

Bitumen (or tar) was used for mortar when building the Tower of Babel ([Genesis 11:3](https://ref.ly/Gen11:3)). It was also used to seal the reed basket in which baby Moses was hidden ([Exodus 2:3](https://ref.ly/Exod2:3)). In Israel, the valley of Siddim had many bitumen pits. Some soldiers fell into them during Chedorlaomer's war against Sodom and Gomorrah ([Genesis 14:10](https://ref.ly/Gen14:10)).

Bitumen is translated as “slime” in the King James Version.

*See also* Asphalt; Minerals and Metals.

* **Associated Passages:** GEN 11:3; GEN 14:10; EXO 2:3
* **Associated Articles:** Asphalt (ID: `3828@TyndaleBibleDictionary`); Minerals and Metals (ID: `7145@TyndaleBibleDictionary`)

