# Aquifer Open Bible Dictionary

**Tyndale Open Bible Dictionary: Aquifer Edition**

This work is an adaptation of *Tyndale Open Bible Dictionary* © 2023 Tyndale House Publishers, licensed under the CC BY\-SA 4\.0 license. The adaptation, *Aquifer Open Bible Dictionary*, was created by BiblioNexus and is also licensed under CC BY\-SA 4\.0\.

This resource has been adapted into multiple languages, including English, Tok Pisin, Arabic (عربي), French (Français), Hindi (हिंदी), Indonesian (Bahasa Indonesia), Portuguese (Português), Russian (Русский), Spanish (Español), Swahili (Kiswahili), and Simplified Chinese (简体中文).



--------------------------------

## Bitter Herbs (id: 4260)

BITTER HERBS
============

Bitter herbs are some kind of bitter\-tasting vegetables, perhaps a certain variety of lettuce. The people of Israel were commanded to eat bitter herbs along with roasted lamb and unleavened bread on the night when God caused the plague of death on all the Egyptian firstborn ([Exodus 12:8–11](https://ref.ly/Exod12:8-Exod12:11)).

The "bitter herbs" mentioned in [Exodus 12:8](https://ref.ly/Exod12:8) and [Numbers 9:11](https://ref.ly/Num9:11) likely refer to plants such as endive (*Cichorium endivia*), the common chicory (*Cichorium intybus*), lettuce (*Lactuca sativa*), or the common dandelion (*Taraxacum officinale*). All of these are weedy plants commonly found in modern Egypt and western Asia. People living in these regions still eat these plants today.

The leaves of ordinary garden lettuce become very bitter when bleached (when they turn white after being covered to prevent sunlight from reaching them). This is also true of the common dandelion. Some scholars suggest that the bitter herbs might have come from thorns and thistles.

* **Associated Passages:** EXO 12:8–EXO 12:11
* **Associated Articles:** Plants (ID: `7761@Unknown`)

