# Aquifer Open Bible Dictionary

**Tyndale Open Bible Dictionary: Aquifer Edition**

This work is an adaptation of *Tyndale Open Bible Dictionary* © 2023 Tyndale House Publishers, licensed under the CC BY\-SA 4\.0 license. The adaptation, *Aquifer Open Bible Dictionary*, was created by BiblioNexus and is also licensed under CC BY\-SA 4\.0\.

This resource has been adapted into multiple languages, including English, Tok Pisin, Arabic (عربي), French (Français), Hindi (हिंदी), Indonesian (Bahasa Indonesia), Portuguese (Português), Russian (Русский), Spanish (Español), Swahili (Kiswahili), and Simplified Chinese (简体中文).



--------------------------------

## Breastpiece, Breastplate (id: 4333)

BREASTPIECE, BREASTPLATE
========================

1. A part of the ceremonial clothing of the high priest ([Exodus 25:7](https://ref.ly/Exod25:7)).

    *See* Priests and Levites.

2. A piece of armor worn to protect the chest. The word is used symbolically in several passages. [Isaiah 59:17](https://ref.ly/Isa59:17) says that God wore righteousness as armor. He did this to take vengeance on his enemies. The apostle Paul urged Christians to wear a breastplate of righteousness to stand against the devil ([Ephesians 6:14](https://ref.ly/Eph6:14)). He also urged them to wear a breastplate of faith and love as they await Christ's return ([1 Thessalonians 5:8](https://ref.ly/1Thess5:8)).

    *See also* Armor and Weapons.

* **Associated Passages:** EXO 25:7; ISA 59:17; EPH 6:14; 1TH 5:8
* **Associated Articles:** Armor and Weapons (ID: `3750@TyndaleBibleDictionary`); Priests and Levites (ID: `7816@TyndaleBibleDictionary`)

