# Aquifer Open Bible Dictionary

**Tyndale Open Bible Dictionary: Aquifer Edition**

This work is an adaptation of *Tyndale Open Bible Dictionary* © 2023 Tyndale House Publishers, licensed under the CC BY\-SA 4\.0 license. The adaptation, *Aquifer Open Bible Dictionary*, was created by BiblioNexus and is also licensed under CC BY\-SA 4\.0\.

This resource has been adapted into multiple languages, including English, Tok Pisin, Arabic (عربي), French (Français), Hindi (हिंदी), Indonesian (Bahasa Indonesia), Portuguese (Português), Russian (Русский), Spanish (Español), Swahili (Kiswahili), and Simplified Chinese (简体中文).



--------------------------------

## Book of the Dead (id: 4302)

BOOK OF THE DEAD
================

The term "Book of the Dead" is a modern name for ancient Egyptian funerary texts. It is a collection of any text, whether found on pyramid walls, coffins, or papyri, that describes a person's journey from this life to the next. Sometimes, it refers to a smaller collection of texts written on papyri (a plant\-based form of paper).

The ancient Egyptian name for these texts was "Chapters of Coming Forth by Day." They were written for any important deceased person. But, in later times, they were mass\-produced with spaces left for the person's name. For influential people, these papyri could be up to 100 feet (30\.5 meters) long and were often lavishly illustrated with scenes depicting their experiences after death.

The ultimate goal of the deceased was to reach the Other World, the kingdom of Osiris, and become a god. To get there, the soul had to pass through various gates, knowing the names of the gatekeepers to be admitted. The texts provided this crucial information. One important phase was the judgment in the Hall of Truth, where the person's heart was weighed against the feather of truth and justice. The soul would make a "negative confession," denying any guilt, especially regarding theft and social relationships. If the heart was as light as the feather, it was declared truthful. If it was not light as a feather, it was destroyed. The texts also included hymns and prayers to assist the soul on its journey, emphasizing magic and ritual more than moral character.


