# Aquifer Open Bible Dictionary

**Tyndale Open Bible Dictionary: Aquifer Edition**

This work is an adaptation of *Tyndale Open Bible Dictionary* © 2023 Tyndale House Publishers, licensed under the CC BY\-SA 4\.0 license. The adaptation, *Aquifer Open Bible Dictionary*, was created by BiblioNexus and is also licensed under CC BY\-SA 4\.0\.

This resource has been adapted into multiple languages, including English, Tok Pisin, Arabic (عربي), French (Français), Hindi (हिंदी), Indonesian (Bahasa Indonesia), Portuguese (Português), Russian (Русский), Spanish (Español), Swahili (Kiswahili), and Simplified Chinese (简体中文).



--------------------------------

## Boil (id: 4292)

BOIL
====

An inflamed area of swelling on the skin. In modern medicine, a "boil" is a pus\-filled swelling. It is caused by infectious germs, usually *staphylococci*. The pus is a mixture of germs and white blood cells, the body’s defense against germs. Although painful, boils usually heal naturally after rupturing or being cut open. A more severe boil with several openings is called a *carbuncle*. If the infection goes deeper and injures internal organs or tissues, it is called an *abscess* and can even be fatal.

In the Bible, the word translated as “boil” probably referred to a variety of skin diseases. The sixth plague that God inflicted on Egypt through Moses and Aaron was a plague of boils ([Exodus 9:9–11](https://ref.ly/Exod9:9-Exod9:11); [Deuteronomy 28:27, 35](https://ref.ly/Deut28:27,Deut28:35)) or blisters. Boils or skin eruptions of a certain type were described in the Mosaic laws about health and cleanliness as one sign of leprosy ([Leviticus 13:1–8, 18–23](https://ref.ly/Lev13:1-Lev13:8,Lev13:18-Lev13:23)). Job’s “terrible boils from the soles of his feet to the crown of his head” ([Job 2:7–8, 12](https://ref.ly/Job2:7-Job2:8,Job2:12)) were probably too widespread to be called boils in the modern sense. He may have had: 

* Smallpox
* Psoriasis
* Tubercular leprosy
* Some other disease that caused severe itching

King Hezekiah’s boil was probably a group of boils ([2 Kings 20:1–7](https://ref.ly/2Kgs20:1-2Kgs20:7); [Isaiah 38:21](https://ref.ly/Isa38:21)). 

*See* Medicine and Medical Practice; Disease; Plagues upon Egypt.

* **Associated Passages:** DEU 28:27; DEU 28:35; JOB 2:12; ISA 38:21; EXO 9:9–EXO 9:11; LEV 13:1–LEV 13:8; LEV 13:18–LEV 13:23; JOB 2:7–JOB 2:8; 2KI 20:1–2KI 20:7
* **Associated Articles:** Disease (ID: `4860@TyndaleBibleDictionary`); Medicine and Medical Practice (ID: `7011@TyndaleBibleDictionary`); Plagues upon Egypt (ID: `7757@TyndaleBibleDictionary`)

