# Aquifer Open Bible Dictionary

**Tyndale Open Bible Dictionary: Aquifer Edition**

This work is an adaptation of *Tyndale Open Bible Dictionary* © 2023 Tyndale House Publishers, licensed under the CC BY\-SA 4\.0 license. The adaptation, *Aquifer Open Bible Dictionary*, was created by BiblioNexus and is also licensed under CC BY\-SA 4\.0\.

This resource has been adapted into multiple languages, including English, Tok Pisin, Arabic (عربي), French (Français), Hindi (हिंदी), Indonesian (Bahasa Indonesia), Portuguese (Português), Russian (Русский), Spanish (Español), Swahili (Kiswahili), and Simplified Chinese (简体中文).



--------------------------------

## Book of Baruch (id: 4018)

BOOK OF BARUCH
==============

A book named after Baruch, who worked as a secretary for the prophet Jeremiah. Some church traditions include it in their canon (the official list of books in the Bible), but others do not.

In ancient times, people wrote several books but said Baruch wrote them. People knew Baruch worked with Jeremiah, so these books were popular.

The Book of Baruch talks about how God is right and wise in all that God does. It also says God will listen when people are sorry for their sins. The book says the Jewish people deserve to be punished by God because they have sinned. But it also says God is kind. At the end, the book tells the people of Israel not to be sad. It says God will care for them and make them great again.

Introduction
------------

The book of Baruch tells the story of the Jewish exiles in Babylon. They fast, weep, and pray over their difficult position, and remember their disobedience to God. They plan to raise money to send to the high priest in Jerusalem so offerings can be made for the exiles. They also send the book of Baruch. The book has been read to the Jews in Babylon. The exiles ask that the book be read on feast days, on “appointed seasons”, and be added to the liturgy (the formal arrangement of prayers, hymns, and other practices used in worship). They ask that the high priest prays for the wellbeing of the Babylonian king Nebuchadnezzar his son so “the Lord will give us strength, and he will give light to our eyes, and we shall live under the protection of… Belshazzar his son, and we shall serve them many days and find favor in their sight” ([Baruch 1:12](https://ref.ly/Bar1:12), Revised Standard Version).

Confession and Prayer for Mercy
-------------------------------

A confession and prayer for mercy follow the introduction. The Jewish people agree that their misfortune is a result of their own sin. They admit that God is just, and they ask for his mercy and forgiveness. “Righteousness belongs to the Lord our God, but confusion of face to us and our fathers, as at this day” ([Baruch 2:6](https://ref.ly/Bar2:6), Revised Standard Version). The Jewish people ask God not to punish them for their disobedience. In particular, they ask that they aren't punished for not having served the king of Babylon. “Hear, O Lord, our prayer and our supplication, and for thy own sake deliver us, and grant us favor in the sight of those who have carried us into exile” ([Baruch 2:14](https://ref.ly/Bar2:14), Revised Standard Version).

Wisdom
------

The Jews are then told to follow God’s law and rediscover the wisdom that comes from the Torah. They are instructed to follow God and not trust in wealth. This wisdom is not abstract but practical, as they might find in the Old Testament. The purpose of this section was to establish that the exiles were still special to God and had a future ministry.

Lamentation and Hope
--------------------

The final section is a lamentation (an expression of deep sorrow) followed by hope for the glory God has planned for Israel: “Take off the garment of your sorrow and affliction, O Jerusalem, and put on forever the beauty of the glory from God. Put on the robe of righteousness from God; put on your head the diadem of the glory of the Everlasting” ([Baruch 5:1–2](https://ref.ly/Bar5:1-Bar5:2), Revised Standard Version).

The Letter of Jeremiah
----------------------

Traditionally, “The Letter of Jeremiah” is included after the fifth chapter. This document is actually a religious document condemning idolatry. It was supposedly sent to the Judeans being taken into exile in Babylon.

Who Wrote the Book of Baruch? When Was It Written?
--------------------------------------------------

The book of Baruch was probably written by several authors. It might have been edited by the writer of the introduction. The "confession" borrows from Daniel 9\. The following prayers for forgiveness are similar to the prophetic texts in the Old Testament. The section of wisdom poetry is very different as it is similar to [Job 28–29](https://ref.ly/Job28:1-Job28:28). The final call for hope probably used [Isaiah 40–45](https://ref.ly/Isa40:1-Isa45:25) as inspiration.

The date of the book has been widely discussed. The book was probably written in Hebrew and translated into Greek. The translator was probably the same person who translated the book of Jeremiah for the Septuagint (an ancient Greek version of the Old Testament). The date of 582 BC has been suggested based on internal evidence from the first section. However, later dates are more likely, possibly even as late as the second century BC.

How Did the Book of Baruch Influence the Church?
------------------------------------------------

Although the book was popular with Jewish people who did not live in the land of Israel, its influence was greater in the early Christian church. Early theologians quoted the book often. The Roman Catholic Church accepted the book of Baruch into their canon at the Council of Trent (1545–1563\).

* **Associated Passages:** BAR 1:12; BAR 2:6; BAR 2:14; BAR 5:1–BAR 5:2; JOB 28:1–JOB 28:28; JOB 29:1–JOB 29:25; ISA 40:1–ISA 45:25

