# Aquifer Open Bible Dictionary

**Tyndale Open Bible Dictionary: Aquifer Edition**

This work is an adaptation of *Tyndale Open Bible Dictionary* © 2023 Tyndale House Publishers, licensed under the CC BY\-SA 4\.0 license. The adaptation, *Aquifer Open Bible Dictionary*, was created by BiblioNexus and is also licensed under CC BY\-SA 4\.0\.

This resource has been adapted into multiple languages, including English, Tok Pisin, Arabic (عربي), French (Français), Hindi (हिंदी), Indonesian (Bahasa Indonesia), Portuguese (Português), Russian (Русский), Spanish (Español), Swahili (Kiswahili), and Simplified Chinese (简体中文).



--------------------------------

## Castor Oil Plant (id: 716003)

Castor Oil Plant
================

A large plant native to tropical Africa and Asia. The castor oil plant (*Ricinus communis*)is grown both for its appearance and for the oil that comes from its seeds. The gourd mentioned in [Jonah 4:6–7](https://ref.ly/Jonah4:6-Jonah4:7) was probably this plant.

The castor bean is a soft\-stemmed shrub that grows 0\.9 to 3\.7 meters (3 to 12 feet tall). It has very large leaves that look like an open human hand. The plant can be found growing in waste places, especially near water. People grow the castor oil plant in both Lebanon and Israel and the surrounding areas. In hot climates, it can grow as tall as a tree and provides good shade because of its many large, umbrella\-like leaves. In the countries of Asia, it is known for how quickly it grows.

The oil taken from the castor bean seeds was used by the Jewish people in religious ceremonies. Rabbinical tradition approved it as one of five kinds of oil allowed for such use. It is important to note that while the oil is useful, the seeds themselves are poisonous if eaten.


