# Aquifer Open Bible Dictionary

**Tyndale Open Bible Dictionary: Aquifer Edition**

This work is an adaptation of *Tyndale Open Bible Dictionary* © 2023 Tyndale House Publishers, licensed under the CC BY\-SA 4\.0 license. The adaptation, *Aquifer Open Bible Dictionary*, was created by BiblioNexus and is also licensed under CC BY\-SA 4\.0\.

This resource has been adapted into multiple languages, including English, Tok Pisin, Arabic (عربي), French (Français), Hindi (हिंदी), Indonesian (Bahasa Indonesia), Portuguese (Português), Russian (Русский), Spanish (Español), Swahili (Kiswahili), and Simplified Chinese (简体中文).



--------------------------------

## Carob Tree (id: 4435)

CAROB TREE
==========

An evergreen tree that belongs to the bean family and is common throughout the Middle East. It produces edible seeds contained in a pod. The seeds look similar to peas.

Scholars generally agree that the "husks" mentioned in Jesus's parable of the prodigal son were the pods of the carob or locust tree ([Luke 15:16](https://ref.ly/Luke15:16)). The carob (*Ceratonia siliqua*) is an attractive evergreen tree that grows commonly throughout Israel and the surrounding areas, Syria, and Egypt. The pods are most plentiful in April and May. They contain numerous seeds surrounded by a sweet, pleasant\-tasting pulp.

These pods were widely used in ancient times, as they are today. They were used as food for cattle, horses, and pigs. During times of food shortage, people also ate the pods. It is possible those who were very poor ate them regularly. The Talmud frequently mentions the carob as a good food source for domestic animals.

The seeds of the carob were once used as a standard of weight and are the origin of the term "carat." Some commentators suggest that the "locusts" that John the Baptist ate were not insects but actually the fruit of the carob tree ([Matthew 3:4](https://ref.ly/Matt3:4)).

* **Associated Articles:** Plants (ID: `7761@Unknown`)

