# Aquifer Open Bible Dictionary

**Tyndale Open Bible Dictionary: Aquifer Edition**

This work is an adaptation of *Tyndale Open Bible Dictionary* © 2023 Tyndale House Publishers, licensed under the CC BY\-SA 4\.0 license. The adaptation, *Aquifer Open Bible Dictionary*, was created by BiblioNexus and is also licensed under CC BY\-SA 4\.0\.

This resource has been adapted into multiple languages, including English, Tok Pisin, Arabic (عربي), French (Français), Hindi (हिंदी), Indonesian (Bahasa Indonesia), Portuguese (Português), Russian (Русский), Spanish (Español), Swahili (Kiswahili), and Simplified Chinese (简体中文).



--------------------------------

## Caterpillar (id: 4446)

CATERPILLAR
===========

Wormlike larva of a butterfly, moth, and some other insects. A larva is the young form of some insects that goes through a complete change before becoming an adult. Such insects pass through four stages:

1. Egg
2. Larva
3. Pupa
4. Adult

The caterpillar is the larval stage of insects. Bees, flies, moths, and butterflies all have a larval or caterpillar stage.

The word “caterpillar” occurs three times in certain translations, like the New Living Translation in [1 Kings 8:37](https://ref.ly/1Kgs8:37), [2 Chronicles 6:28](https://ref.ly/2Chr6:28), and [Psalm 78:46](https://ref.ly/Ps78:46). In the book of Joel, the same word is translated “locust” ([Joel 1:4](https://ref.ly/Joel1:4); [2:25](https://ref.ly/Joel2:25)). The locust and grasshopper do not have a full transformation. They have only three stages: 

1. Egg
2. Nymph
3. Adult

The nymph is a tiny adult. Its wings are not fully developed, though their outline may be present. There are several nymph stages known as instars. The reference to locust refers to the last instars. The wing structures are still folded and enclosed in a sac. But, they are recognizable. That form of the insect is about two and a half centimeters (one inch) long.

*See* Locust.

* **Associated Articles:** Animals (ID: `3614@Unknown`); Locusts (ID: `6766@TyndaleBibleDictionary`)

