# Aquifer Open Bible Dictionary

**Tyndale Open Bible Dictionary: Aquifer Edition**

This work is an adaptation of *Tyndale Open Bible Dictionary* © 2023 Tyndale House Publishers, licensed under the CC BY\-SA 4\.0 license. The adaptation, *Aquifer Open Bible Dictionary*, was created by BiblioNexus and is also licensed under CC BY\-SA 4\.0\.

This resource has been adapted into multiple languages, including English, Tok Pisin, Arabic (عربي), French (Français), Hindi (हिंदी), Indonesian (Bahasa Indonesia), Portuguese (Português), Russian (Русский), Spanish (Español), Swahili (Kiswahili), and Simplified Chinese (简体中文).



--------------------------------

## Cauda (id: 4449)

CAUDA
=====

Cauda was a small island south of Crete. The ship carrying the apostle Paul to Rome stopped at Cauda during a storm to find temporary protection ([Acts 27:16](https://ref.ly/Acts27:16)). 

Behind the island, the water was calmer. In this protected area, the sailors pulled on board a small boat they had been towing behind the ship. They also worked to strengthen the ship's hull.

Even after they lowered the sails, the strong winds pushed them past the island. Eventually, the ship was wrecked.

Cauda is the modern island of Gaudos (also called Gozzo). Ancient handwritten copies of the Bible spell the name in different ways. Some use "Cauda" (as in most modern Bible versions), while others use "Clauda" (as in the King James Version and New American Standard Bible).

* **Associated Passages:** ACT 27:16

