# Aquifer Open Bible Dictionary

**Tyndale Open Bible Dictionary: Aquifer Edition**

This work is an adaptation of *Tyndale Open Bible Dictionary* © 2023 Tyndale House Publishers, licensed under the CC BY\-SA 4\.0 license. The adaptation, *Aquifer Open Bible Dictionary*, was created by BiblioNexus and is also licensed under CC BY\-SA 4\.0\.

This resource has been adapted into multiple languages, including English, Tok Pisin, Arabic (عربي), French (Français), Hindi (हिंदी), Indonesian (Bahasa Indonesia), Portuguese (Português), Russian (Русский), Spanish (Español), Swahili (Kiswahili), and Simplified Chinese (简体中文).



--------------------------------

## Carchemish (id: 4427)

CARCHEMISH
==========

Ancient city commanding an important ford on the west bank of the upper Euphrates River, about 65 miles (104\.6 kilometers) northeast of Aleppo. Today part of the ruin is located in Turkey and part in Syria. The word is also written “Charchemish” ([2 Chr 35:20](https://ref.ly/2Chr35:20), kjv). The meaning of the name is uncertain, although recent discoveries at Ebla suggest “city of Chemosh” (Moabite god).

A north\-south trade route (roughly following the river) and an east\-west route (connecting Nineveh with the Mediterranean Sea) both passed through Carchemish. Pottery finds indicate that the site was occupied in prehistoric times. The earliest reference to it is in the Ebla tablets (c. 2400 BC). Since Carchemish is about 75 miles (120\.7 kilometers) west of Haran, Abraham probably passed through Carchemish on his way to Canaan.

Early in its history Carchemish was allied first to Mari and then to Aleppo. In 1355 BC it fell to the Hittites, became a regional capital of eastern Hatti, and adopted Hittite culture and language. After several centuries of unsuccessful attempts to incorporate Carchemish into their empire, the Assyrians under Sargon II finally conquered the city in 717 BC ([Is 10:9](https://ref.ly/Isa10:9)) and made it their northwestern stronghold. When Nebuchadnezzar’s Neo\-Babylonian kingdom succeeded the Assyrian Empire, Carchemish was the last city to fall (605 BC). The Assyrians were aided in their defense by Pharaoh Neco II of Egypt ([2 Chr 35:20](https://ref.ly/2Chr35:20); [Jer 46:2](https://ref.ly/Jer46:2)). Thereafter, the city decreased in importance.

Archaeological excavations show that the city had features of both Hittite and Assyrian architecture. It had a casemate wall atop sloping embankments to hinder attackers. Within the city on the highest point stood a citadel surrounded by its own wall, as well as a palace with its own temple and monumental staircase.

* **Associated Passages:** 2CH 35:20; ISA 10:9; JER 46:2

