# Aquifer Open Bible Dictionary

**Tyndale Open Bible Dictionary: Aquifer Edition**

This work is an adaptation of *Tyndale Open Bible Dictionary* © 2023 Tyndale House Publishers, licensed under the CC BY\-SA 4\.0 license. The adaptation, *Aquifer Open Bible Dictionary*, was created by BiblioNexus and is also licensed under CC BY\-SA 4\.0\.

This resource has been adapted into multiple languages, including English, Tok Pisin, Arabic (عربي), French (Français), Hindi (हिंदी), Indonesian (Bahasa Indonesia), Portuguese (Português), Russian (Русский), Spanish (Español), Swahili (Kiswahili), and Simplified Chinese (简体中文).



--------------------------------

## Bush (id: 4367)

BUSH
====

A bush is a low, branching, woody plant. A bush is usually smaller than a tree. There are different opinions about the bush from which God appeared to Moses ([Exodus 3:2–4](https://ref.ly/Exod3:2-Exod3:4)). From the biblical account, it seems most likely that this was a miraculous event.

However, some people look for a natural explanation. They believe the burning bush may have been the crimson\-flowered mistletoe or acacia strap flower (*Loranthus acaciae*). This plant grows in great numbers as a partial parasite on various acacia shrubs, such as the thorny acacia (*Acacia nilotica*). These shrubs grow in Israel and the surrounding areas, as well as Sinai. When in full bloom, the mistletoe makes the shrub or tree appear to be on fire. This happens because its brilliant flame\-colored blossoms stand out against the green leaves and yellow flowers of the host plants.

* **Associated Articles:** Plants (ID: `7761@Unknown`)

