# Aquifer Open Bible Dictionary

**Tyndale Open Bible Dictionary: Aquifer Edition**

This work is an adaptation of *Tyndale Open Bible Dictionary* © 2023 Tyndale House Publishers, licensed under the CC BY\-SA 4\.0 license. The adaptation, *Aquifer Open Bible Dictionary*, was created by BiblioNexus and is also licensed under CC BY\-SA 4\.0\.

This resource has been adapted into multiple languages, including English, Tok Pisin, Arabic (عربي), French (Français), Hindi (हिंदी), Indonesian (Bahasa Indonesia), Portuguese (Português), Russian (Русский), Spanish (Español), Swahili (Kiswahili), and Simplified Chinese (简体中文).



--------------------------------

## Caesar’s Household (id: 4379)

CAESAR’S HOUSEHOLD
==================

Caesar’s household was the group of people who worked for the Roman emperor. This included both slaves and free people. They lived in Rome and in other parts of the Roman Empire.

The apostle Paul greeted "those from the household of Caesar” in one of his letters ([Philippians 4:22](https://ref.ly/Phil4:22)). Caesar was the title of the emperor of Rome. The emperor’s household had hundreds of workers. Many of their jobs were respected and important in Roman society.

When Paul arrived in Rome, many people from Caesar’s household welcomed him. This is reported in a second\-century writing called the Martyrdom of Paul. Paul also spoke with Jewish leaders in Rome and taught openly about Jesus. He preached without being stopped ([Acts 28:17, 31](https://ref.ly/Acts28:17,Acts28:31)). Some men and women believed his message ([Acts 28:23–24](https://ref.ly/Acts28:23-Acts28:24)). Some of these new believers were likely from Caesar’s household. The message about Jesus even reached the whole Praetorian Guard ([Philippians 1:13](https://ref.ly/Phil1:13)), a special group of Roman soldiers who guarded the emperor. 

Some Bible scholars believe that certain people mentioned in [Romans 16](https://ref.ly/Rom16:1-Rom16:27) may have also belonged to the emperor’s household.

*See also* Caesars, The.

* **Associated Passages:** ACT 28:17; ACT 28:31; PHP 1:13; PHP 4:22; ACT 28:23–ACT 28:24; ROM 16:1–ROM 16:27
* **Associated Articles:** The Caesars (ID: `4380@TyndaleBibleDictionary`)

