# Aquifer Open Bible Dictionary

**Tyndale Open Bible Dictionary: Aquifer Edition**

This work is an adaptation of *Tyndale Open Bible Dictionary* © 2023 Tyndale House Publishers, licensed under the CC BY\-SA 4\.0 license. The adaptation, *Aquifer Open Bible Dictionary*, was created by BiblioNexus and is also licensed under CC BY\-SA 4\.0\.

This resource has been adapted into multiple languages, including English, Tok Pisin, Arabic (عربي), French (Français), Hindi (हिंदी), Indonesian (Bahasa Indonesia), Portuguese (Português), Russian (Русский), Spanish (Español), Swahili (Kiswahili), and Simplified Chinese (简体中文).



--------------------------------

## Catholic Letters (id: 4447)

CATHOLIC LETTERS
================

A traditional name for seven New Testament books or letters: 

* James
* 1 and 2 Peter
* 1, 2, and 3 John
* Jude

The term “catholic” has been understood in different ways: 

1. These letters express the views of all the apostles.
2. They are canonical or genuine.
3. Thus they were distinguished from works containing false beliefs written around the same time.
4. They are encyclical, that is, addressed to general audiences of believers rather than to specific groups, as were some of the apostle Paul’s letters. Of course, 2 John and 3 John are exceptions to this interpretation. 2 John is addressed to a lady or a local church. 3 John is addressed to an individual.

*See also* James, Letter of; John, Letters of; Jude, Letter of; Peter, First Letter of; Peter, Second Letter of.

* **Associated Articles:** James, Letter of (ID: `6201@TyndaleBibleDictionary`); John, Letters of (ID: `6410@TyndaleBibleDictionary`); Jude, Letter of (ID: `6488@TyndaleBibleDictionary`); Peter, First Letter of (ID: `7678@TyndaleBibleDictionary`); Peter, Second Letter of (ID: `7679@TyndaleBibleDictionary`)

