# Aquifer Open Bible Dictionary

**Tyndale Open Bible Dictionary: Aquifer Edition**

This work is an adaptation of *Tyndale Open Bible Dictionary* © 2023 Tyndale House Publishers, licensed under the CC BY\-SA 4\.0 license. The adaptation, *Aquifer Open Bible Dictionary*, was created by BiblioNexus and is also licensed under CC BY\-SA 4\.0\.

This resource has been adapted into multiple languages, including English, Tok Pisin, Arabic (عربي), French (Français), Hindi (हिंदी), Indonesian (Bahasa Indonesia), Portuguese (Português), Russian (Русский), Spanish (Español), Swahili (Kiswahili), and Simplified Chinese (简体中文).



--------------------------------

## Chimham (id: 4529)

CHIMHAM
=======

A son of Barzillai, according to the Jewish historian Josephus. Chimham was a very wealthy man who provided King David and his men with food. This happened while they were in Mahanaim when David was escaping from his son Absalom ([2 Samuel 19:32](https://ref.ly/2Sam19:32)). David invited Barzillai to come back with him to Jerusalem. But Barzillai declined this offer. Instead, he asked that David show kindness to Chimham (verses [37–40](https://ref.ly/2Sam19:37-2Sam19:40)). David agreed to this request. He later instructed his son Solomon to give Chimham regular support from the palace ([1 Kings 2:7](https://ref.ly/1Kgs2:7)). 

His name appears centuries later in a place called Geruth Chimham, which was located near Bethlehem. This is where the people whom Johanan had rescued from Ishmael stayed temporarily before they planned to continue their journey to Egypt ([Jeremiah 41:17](https://ref.ly/Jer41:17)).

* **Associated Articles:** Kimham (ID: `6584@Unknown`)

