# Aquifer Open Bible Dictionary

**Tyndale Open Bible Dictionary: Aquifer Edition**

This work is an adaptation of *Tyndale Open Bible Dictionary* © 2023 Tyndale House Publishers, licensed under the CC BY\-SA 4\.0 license. The adaptation, *Aquifer Open Bible Dictionary*, was created by BiblioNexus and is also licensed under CC BY\-SA 4\.0\.

This resource has been adapted into multiple languages, including English, Tok Pisin, Arabic (عربي), French (Français), Hindi (हिंदी), Indonesian (Bahasa Indonesia), Portuguese (Português), Russian (Русский), Spanish (Español), Swahili (Kiswahili), and Simplified Chinese (简体中文).



--------------------------------

## Chaldea, Chaldeans (id: 4468)

CHALDEA\*, CHALDEANS
====================

Ancient region in Mesopotamia and its inhabitants. The name comes from the Chaldean (or Kaldu) tribes that shared Babylonia in southeastern Mesopotamia with several other peoples, especially the Sumerians and Akkadians. After the old Babylonian Empire was absorbed by the Assyrians, the Chaldeans under Nebuchadnezzar’s leadership took control and built a Neo\-Babylonian Empire that dominated the Near East for nearly a century. The region called Chaldea is also associated with the patriarch Abraham, whose Mesopotamian home was “Ur of the Chaldeans” ([Gn 11:28](https://ref.ly/Gen11:28)).

The Land and People
-------------------

Until the end of the eighth century BC, Chaldea referred only to a small territory in southern Babylonia. Within 100 years, following a rapid and successful bid for power, it embraced all of Babylonia. At that time it included the territory from Baghdad on the Tigris River to the Persian Gulf and extended up the Euphrates River as far as the city of Hit. Although Chaldea is usually placed between the Tigris and Euphrates, it reached into the flatlands between the Tigris and the Zagros Mountains to the east and also included some land west of the Euphrates. The Arabian Desert formed its western boundary. Chaldea rarely exceeded 40 miles (64\.4 kilometers) in width, having an area of about 8,000 square miles (12,872 square kilometers), approximately the size of New Jersey. On today’s map Chaldea falls inside Iraq, with its southwestern tip touching the small kingdom of Kuwait.

History
-------

First mention of the Chaldeans is found in the Assyrian annals of Ashurnasirpal II (885–860 BC), leading some authorities to suggest that they entered Babylonia about 1000 BC. They are usually associated (though not identified) with the Semitic Aramean tribes who were constantly pushing their way from the western deserts into Mesopotamia. They settled primarily in the southern tip of Babylonia, at the northern end of the Persian Gulf, perhaps centuries before the Assyrian annals mentioned them.

[Job 1:17](https://ref.ly/Job1:17) mentions three bands of Chaldeans who participated in a raid against Job’s camels and servants, probably in the vicinity of Edom or northern Arabia. Their presence in those regions does not necessarily mean they lived nearby, since armies from Babylonia (Sinar) and Elam ranged as far as Palestine centuries earlier ([Gn 14:1–2](https://ref.ly/Gen14:1-Gen14:2)).

### Under Assyrian Rule

Living by the marshes and lakes of the extreme south, the Chaldeans maintained a high degree of independence, even when Assyrian dominion extended over them. It was difficult for invading armies to maneuver in the Chaldean marshes. As a result, the Chaldeans resisted paying taxes or providing any form of service to the Assyrian government. When the Assyrians sought to limit their freedom, the Chaldeans turned to guerrilla warfare and political intrigue. They were quick to disregard treaties or to switch alliances as circumstances dictated. Under Assyrian rule, whereas the native residents of Babylonian cities were generally content, the Chaldeans became the leaders of a national independence movement. For 250 years the Assyrians had to enforce their dominion against persistent Chaldean attempts to assert their autonomy and influence.

Finally, in 721 BC the Chaldean leader Marduk\-apla\-iddina II (known as Merodach\-baladan in [2 Kgs 20:12](https://ref.ly/2Kgs20:12) and [Is 39:1](https://ref.ly/Isa39:1), who sent an embassy to Hezekiah, king of Judah) entered Babylon and claimed the kingship of Babylonia, a position long appointed by the Assyrian king. Crafty and resourceful, he successfully maintained his claim for 10 years before being driven back into his own southern territory by Assyria’s Sargon II. On Sargon’s death in 705 BC, he reasserted his claim but was defeated by the new Assyrian king, Sennacherib, who destroyed Babylon as a lesson to the Chaldeans and their allies.

Sennacherib’s son and successor, Esarhaddon, pursued a policy of conciliation with the Babylonians and rebuilt their capital city, a gesture that effectively neutralized Chaldean agitation and inaugurated a period of peace that lasted over 30 years. The last unsuccessful revolt occurred under Ashurbanipal’s reign and was actually instigated by his brother, whom the Assyrian king had appointed to the Babylonian throne. The Chaldeans gladly joined the rebellion, which was crushed in 648 BC.

### The Neo\-Babylonian Empire

Two decades later, at the time of Ashurbanipal’s death, Assyrian power suddenly and dramatically slipped. Nabopolassar, a Chaldean governor, took the opportunity to drive the Assyrians out of Babylonia. He became king of Babylon in 625 BC. Allied with the Medes, the Babylonians went on to destroy the Assyrian Empire, capturing the capital cities of Asshur in 614 and Nineveh in 612\. They divided the conquered lands with the Medes and annexed the Assyrian regions west and south of the Tigris, creating a new Babylonian Empire. (The first Babylonian Empire, with which Hammurabi is associated, had flourished over 1,000 years earlier.) Throughout the Near East, Chaldea and Babylonia became synonymous.

During the long and brilliant reign of Nabopolassar’s son Nebuchadnezzar (or Nebuchadrezzar) II, the empire reached its zenith. As crown prince, he won a decisive victory in 605 BC over the Egyptians at Carchemish (the battle mentioned in [2 Chr 35:20](https://ref.ly/2Chr35:20)), which effectively established Babylonian supremacy in the Near East (see [2 Kgs 24:7](https://ref.ly/2Kgs24:7)). That same year the southern kingdom of Judah became a vassal nation to Babylon. Nebuchadnezzar won the submission of King Jehoiachim, carried off the choicest articles from the temple for his own temple in Babylon, and took the outstanding leaders and youth of Judah captive ([2 Kgs 24:1](https://ref.ly/2Kgs24:1); [2 Chr 36:5–7](https://ref.ly/2Chr36:5-2Chr36:7); [Dn 1:1–4](https://ref.ly/Dan1:1-Dan1:4)). When Judah revolted several years later at the instigation of Egypt, the Chaldean army captured Jerusalem in 597 BC. Judah’s new king, Jehoiachin, was deposed at that time together with more of its leaders ([2 Kgs 24:8–16](https://ref.ly/2Kgs24:8-2Kgs24:16)). A second revolt in 594 BC by the Chaldean\-appointed king (Zedekiah) resulted in a third invasion, the destruction of Jerusalem in 586 BC, and the exile of most of Judah’s citizens ([2 Kgs 24:20–25:12](https://ref.ly/2Kgs24:20-2Kgs25:12); [2 Chr 36:11–21](https://ref.ly/2Chr36:11-2Chr36:21)). With the booty from that and other conquests, Nebuchadnezzar built Babylon into one of the most dazzling cities in the ancient world. His projects included the Hanging Gardens (one of the seven wonders of the ancient world), the Ishtar Gate, and a 17\-mile (27\-kilometer) outer wall designed for defense of the city. His pride in such accomplishments eventually brought the judgment of God ([Dn 4:30–33](https://ref.ly/Dan4:30-Dan4:33)).

Nebuchadnezzar was succeeded by his son Amel\-marduk (Evil\-merodach in [2 Kgs 25:27](https://ref.ly/2Kgs25:27) and [Jer 52:31](https://ref.ly/Jer52:31), remembered there for his special kindness to the exiled king Jehoiachin). After two years he was killed in an armed rebellion led by his brother\-in\-law, Nergal\-shar\-usur (Nergal\-sharezer of [Jer 39:3](https://ref.ly/Jer39:3)), who attempted to establish his own dynasty. After a four\-year reign Nergal\-shar\-usur was succeeded by his son, who lasted only a few months before being ousted by a usurper, Nabonidus.

### The Fall of Babylon

Nabonidus was the last of the Chaldean monarchs. His installation as king was supported by many Babylonian officials. They were watching their former allies, the Medes, gradually become a rival power and saw in Nabonidus a ruler strong enough to meet their threat. Strong or not, his attempts to reform Babylonian religion proved extremely unpopular, and his efforts to strengthen the economy were unsuccessful. Both facts made Babylon an unpleasant residence for Nabonidus; during one extended absence from the capital city, he installed his son Belshazzar as co\-regent. (Belshazzar’s position explains why he is described as the king of Babylon in the OT book of Daniel and why in [Dn 5:7](https://ref.ly/Dan5:7) he could make Daniel only “the third ruler in the kingdom.”)

While Belshazzar was handling government affairs, the famous incident of the “writing on the wall” occurred, ominously predicting Babylon’s downfall ([Dn 5](https://ref.ly/Dan5:1-Dan5:31)). The Elamites, in fact, were already attacking the empire’s eastern flank. Rumors of Persian power in the north brought Nabonidus back to Babylon just in time for an invasion by the Persian king, Cyrus the Great. Cyrus took Babylon without a fight, putting an end both to Chaldean power and to the Neo\-Babylonian Empire.

*See also* Assyria, Assyrians; Astrology; Babylon, Babylonia; Daniel, Book of; Diaspora of the Jews; Nebuchadnezzar, Nebuchadrezzar; Ur (Place).

* **Associated Passages:** GEN 11:28; 2KI 20:12; 2KI 24:1; 2KI 24:7; 2KI 25:27; 2CH 35:20; JOB 1:17; ISA 39:1; JER 39:3; JER 52:31; DAN 5:7; GEN 14:1–GEN 14:2; 2CH 36:5–2CH 36:7; DAN 1:1–DAN 1:4; 2KI 24:8–2KI 24:16; 2KI 24:20–2KI 25:12; 2CH 36:11–2CH 36:21; DAN 4:30–DAN 4:33; DAN 5:1–DAN 5:31
* **Associated Articles:** Assyria, Assyrians (ID: `3841@TyndaleBibleDictionary`); Astrology (ID: `3845@TyndaleBibleDictionary`); Babylon, Babylonia (ID: `3957@TyndaleBibleDictionary`); Nebuchadnezzar, Nebuchadrezzar (ID: `7332@TyndaleBibleDictionary`); Book of Daniel (ID: `4746@TyndaleBibleDictionary`); Diaspora of the Jews (ID: `4831@TyndaleBibleDictionary`); Ur (Place) (ID: `8980@TyndaleBibleDictionary`)

