# Aquifer Open Bible Dictionary

**Tyndale Open Bible Dictionary: Aquifer Edition**

This work is an adaptation of *Tyndale Open Bible Dictionary* © 2023 Tyndale House Publishers, licensed under the CC BY\-SA 4\.0 license. The adaptation, *Aquifer Open Bible Dictionary*, was created by BiblioNexus and is also licensed under CC BY\-SA 4\.0\.

This resource has been adapted into multiple languages, including English, Tok Pisin, Arabic (عربي), French (Français), Hindi (हिंदी), Indonesian (Bahasa Indonesia), Portuguese (Português), Russian (Русский), Spanish (Español), Swahili (Kiswahili), and Simplified Chinese (简体中文).



--------------------------------

## Chaff (id: 4465)

CHAFF
=====

Loose hulls separated from the edible grains by threshing and winnowing. In Bible times, winnowed grain was a common sight. The wind blew away the lighter husks, leaving only the grain. This gave rise to a strong metaphor. It symbolized that good people or nations would survive judgment, but the wicked would not. So, for example, sinners “are like chaff driven off by the wind” ([Psalm 1:4](https://ref.ly/Ps1:4)).

The prophet Isaiah said of the Assyrians, “You conceive chaff; you give birth to stubble. Your breath is a fire that will consume you” ([Isaiah 33:11](https://ref.ly/Isa33:11)). In Nebuchadnezzar’s dream, the world's nations collapse and are like the chaff of the summer threshing floors before the victory of the coming kingdom of God ([Daniel 2:35](https://ref.ly/Dan2:35)).

In the New Testament, it is said that the coming Messiah will “gather His wheat into the barn; but He will burn up the chaff with unquenchable fire” ([Matthew 3:12](https://ref.ly/Matt3:12)).

* **Associated Passages:** PSA 1:4; ISA 33:11; DAN 2:35; MAT 3:12

