# Aquifer Open Bible Dictionary

**Tyndale Open Bible Dictionary: Aquifer Edition**

This work is an adaptation of *Tyndale Open Bible Dictionary* © 2023 Tyndale House Publishers, licensed under the CC BY\-SA 4\.0 license. The adaptation, *Aquifer Open Bible Dictionary*, was created by BiblioNexus and is also licensed under CC BY\-SA 4\.0\.

This resource has been adapted into multiple languages, including English, Tok Pisin, Arabic (عربي), French (Français), Hindi (हिंदी), Indonesian (Bahasa Indonesia), Portuguese (Português), Russian (Русский), Spanish (Español), Swahili (Kiswahili), and Simplified Chinese (简体中文).



--------------------------------

## Cenchrea, Cenchreae (id: 4454)

CENCHREA, CENCHREAE\*
=====================

Seaport city that served the maritime needs of the larger city of Corinth, about eight miles (12\.9 kilometers) to the west. Cenchrea is known as early as the fifth century BC in connection with an Athenian attack on Corinth. Before the Corinthian Canal was cut through the isthmus, traffic to Europe from Asia often passed from Cenchrea through Corinth to Lechaion.

Excavations begun in 1963 have located the harbor mole (breakwater), warehouse remains dating to the early first century, and a large second\-century stone building. A fourth\-century church testifies to the influence of Christianity in the city. Portions of the ancient road leading southeast from the Cenchrean Gate in Corinth may still be seen among the ruins of that city’s agora (marketplace).

Cenchrea is mentioned twice in the NT. The apostle Paul took an oath requiring the cutting of his hair before leaving Cenchrea during his third missionary journey ([Acts 18:18](https://ref.ly/Acts18:18)). In his letter to the church in Rome, Paul commended Phoebe, a deaconess of the church in Cenchrea, well known for her Christian service ([Rom 16:1](https://ref.ly/Rom16:1)).

* **Associated Passages:** ACT 18:18; ROM 16:1

