# Aquifer Open Bible Dictionary

**Tyndale Open Bible Dictionary: Aquifer Edition**

This work is an adaptation of *Tyndale Open Bible Dictionary* © 2023 Tyndale House Publishers, licensed under the CC BY\-SA 4\.0 license. The adaptation, *Aquifer Open Bible Dictionary*, was created by BiblioNexus and is also licensed under CC BY\-SA 4\.0\.

This resource has been adapted into multiple languages, including English, Tok Pisin, Arabic (عربي), French (Français), Hindi (हिंदी), Indonesian (Bahasa Indonesia), Portuguese (Português), Russian (Русский), Spanish (Español), Swahili (Kiswahili), and Simplified Chinese (简体中文).



--------------------------------

## Chorazin (id: 4544)

CHORAZIN
========

A city in Palestine where Jesus performed many miracles but the people did not repent, causing him to pronounce judgment on them ([Matthew 11:21–24](https://ref.ly/Matt11:21-Matt11:24); [Luke 10:13–14](https://ref.ly/Luke10:13-Luke10:14)). Most of Jesus's miracles had been done in Chorazin, Bethsaida, and Capernaum. But, the people there did not respond or repent ([Matthew 11:20](https://ref.ly/Matt11:20)).

Chorazin was likely near Capernaum and Bethsaida. The church father Jerome (who lived around AD 400\) wrote about Capernaum. He said that it was about 3\.2 kilometers (2 miles) from Capernaum, which is on the northwest shore of the Sea of Galilee. 

Most scholars believe that the ruins called Khirbet Kerazeh, located on the hills north of Capernaum, are the remains of ancient Chorazin. These ruins show that it was once an important city. Among the remains is a synagogue (Jewish place of worship) probably built in the fourth century AD. The synagogue contains a carved stone seat with an inscription, which is an example of a "Moses' seat” ([Matthew 23:2](https://ref.ly/Matt23:2)). According to the Jewish Talmud (a central text in Judaism), Chorazin was known for its wheat.

* **Associated Articles:** Korazin (ID: `6645@Unknown`)

