# Aquifer Open Bible Dictionary

**Tyndale Open Bible Dictionary: Aquifer Edition**

This work is an adaptation of *Tyndale Open Bible Dictionary* © 2023 Tyndale House Publishers, licensed under the CC BY\-SA 4\.0 license. The adaptation, *Aquifer Open Bible Dictionary*, was created by BiblioNexus and is also licensed under CC BY\-SA 4\.0\.

This resource has been adapted into multiple languages, including English, Tok Pisin, Arabic (عربي), French (Français), Hindi (हिंदी), Indonesian (Bahasa Indonesia), Portuguese (Português), Russian (Русский), Spanish (Español), Swahili (Kiswahili), and Simplified Chinese (简体中文).



--------------------------------

## Cinnamon (id: 4564)

CINNAMON
========

A spice made from the dried inner bark of several trees that come from tropical Asia. The bark has a pleasant smell. It can be ground and used as a spice. The cinnamon mentioned in [Exodus 30:23](https://ref.ly/Exod30:23), [Proverbs 7:17](https://ref.ly/Prov7:17), [Song of Songs 4:14](https://ref.ly/Song4:14), and [Revelation 18:13](https://ref.ly/Rev18:13) is certainly from the *Cinnamomum zeylanicum* tree.

The cinnamon tree is relatively small, never growing taller than 9\.1 meters (30 feet). It has smooth, ash\-colored bark, wide\-spreading branches, and white flowers. Its shiny, beautifully veined evergreen leaves grow about 22\.9 centimeters (9 inches) long and 5\.1 centimeters (2 inches) wide.

The Jewish people considered cinnamon a deliciously fragrant substance and valued it highly both as a spice and a perfume. It was one of the main ingredients used to make the precious ointment, or "holy oil," that Moses was commanded to use in the tabernacle. This oil was used for anointing the holy vessels and the priests who served there. Cinnamon was certainly very expensive and highly treasured.

*See* Food and Food Preparation.

* **Associated Articles:** Food and Food Preparation (ID: `5286@TyndaleBibleDictionary`); Plants (ID: `7761@Unknown`)

