# Aquifer Open Bible Dictionary

**Tyndale Open Bible Dictionary: Aquifer Edition**

This work is an adaptation of *Tyndale Open Bible Dictionary* © 2023 Tyndale House Publishers, licensed under the CC BY\-SA 4\.0 license. The adaptation, *Aquifer Open Bible Dictionary*, was created by BiblioNexus and is also licensed under CC BY\-SA 4\.0\.

This resource has been adapted into multiple languages, including English, Tok Pisin, Arabic (عربي), French (Français), Hindi (हिंदी), Indonesian (Bahasa Indonesia), Portuguese (Português), Russian (Русский), Spanish (Español), Swahili (Kiswahili), and Simplified Chinese (简体中文).



--------------------------------

## Clement, Epistle of (id: 4589)

CLEMENT, First Letter of
========================

Who Wrote the First Letter of Clement?
--------------------------------------

A letter written by Clement of Rome to the church at Corinth. It was written around AD 96\. This letter is probably the earliest surviving Christian letter outside the New Testament. Around AD 170, Dionysius of Corinth recorded the earliest claim that Clement was the author of this letter. Origen and Eusebius also identified Clement as the letter’s author.

What Is the Message of the First Letter of Clement? Why Was It Written?
-----------------------------------------------------------------------

The letter instructs several younger believers who led a revolt and ousted the leading elders of the Corinthian church. These young men may have wanted a more flexible system of ministry and recognition of their spiritual gifts. They were ascetics who practiced extreme self\-discipline and restraint. They also claimed to have secret knowledge (*gnosis*) of the faith that was revealed only to the elite.

This letter was sent from the entire Roman church rather than from a single individual. The early churches did not consider themselves to be isolated loners. They knew they were a part of the universal church. This meant they were not immune to the events and conditions of neighboring churches. They felt responsible to warn and advise each other.

The letter frequently cites the Septuagint (the Greek translation of the Old Testament). The author mingles New Testament and Old Testament themes. Clement exemplifies the heroes of the Old Testament as patterns for Christian conduct. The apostle Paul’s First Letter to the Corinthians is the pattern for Clement’s letter to the same church. Clement closely imitates [1 Corinthians 13](https://ref.ly/1Cor13:1-1Cor13:13) in chapters 49 and 50\. He bases many of his beliefs on Paul’s writings about the resurrection and schisms. 

Clement focuses on morality and ethics. Occasionally, the letter is more like Hellenistic Judaism and Stoicism than Pauline theology. Clement also describes a hierarchical form of ministry where different leaders have different levels of authority. He also endorses the doctrine of apostolic succession. Apostolic succession is the idea that church leaders are connected to the original apostles.

Why Is This Letter Important?
-----------------------------

Clement used many quotes from Jesus's teachings throughout his letter. He included sayings found in Matthew, Mark, and Luke. He also quoted Romans, 1 Corinthians, and Hebrews. Clement's letter shows us that by the end of the first century, many churches were already sharing and reading the writings that later became part of the New Testament. These texts were being copied and sent from one church to another. Clement’s letter provides important evidence for the martyrdom of the apostles Peter and Paul. It also provides evidence for Paul’s mission to the “western boundary” (this might refer to Spain).

* **Associated Passages:** 1CO 13:1–1CO 13:13

