# Aquifer Open Bible Dictionary

**Tyndale Open Bible Dictionary: Aquifer Edition**

This work is an adaptation of *Tyndale Open Bible Dictionary* © 2023 Tyndale House Publishers, licensed under the CC BY\-SA 4\.0 license. The adaptation, *Aquifer Open Bible Dictionary*, was created by BiblioNexus and is also licensed under CC BY\-SA 4\.0\.

This resource has been adapted into multiple languages, including English, Tok Pisin, Arabic (عربي), French (Français), Hindi (हिंदी), Indonesian (Bahasa Indonesia), Portuguese (Português), Russian (Русский), Spanish (Español), Swahili (Kiswahili), and Simplified Chinese (简体中文).



--------------------------------

## City (id: 4578)

CITY
====

The Bible does not generally distinguish between a city, town, or village. There is an emphasis upon walls and fortifications ([Leviticus 25:29–31](https://ref.ly/Lev25:29-Lev25:31); [Joshua 19:35](https://ref.ly/Josh19:35)). The Bible repeats references to towers, gates, and sieges. So, cities provided the primary security for the surrounding towns and villages.

Ancient Times
-------------

### Practical Requirements

Settled communities depended upon a controlled food supply. Unlike city dwellers, nomads (people who moved from place to place) lived in tents that they could carry as they searched for food. There is a contrast between settled city life and the nomadic experience. The Bible shows this difference when it talks about Abraham, who lived a partly nomadic life: “For he was looking forward to the city with foundations, whose architect and builder is God” ([Hebrews 11:10](https://ref.ly/Heb11:10)).

### The First Biblical City

The first biblical reference to a city is in [Genesis 4:17](https://ref.ly/Gen4:17). The Hebrew verb indicates that Cain “was building” the city. It is probable that he did not complete it. Nor did he stay there. God earlier condemned him to a live as "a fugitive and a wanderer" (verse [12](https://ref.ly/Gen4:12)).

The Genesis account is consistent when affirming that city life started early. The first human offspring were Cain and Abel. They produced food ([Genesis 4:2](https://ref.ly/Gen4:2)). Cain was a farmer, and Abel a shepherd. [Genesis 4](https://ref.ly/Gen4:1-Gen4:26) shows both the need to produce food and the specialization that results. Jabal was a tentmaker (verse [20](https://ref.ly/Gen4:20)). Jubal was a musician (verse [21](https://ref.ly/Gen4:21)). Tubal\-Cain was a metalworker (verse [22](https://ref.ly/Gen4:22)).

### Archaeological Evidence

Archaeological discoveries generally support the idea that cities began very early. Jericho is the oldest known city discovered in the land of Canaan. By testing wood from the site using carbon\-14 dating, archaeologist Kathleen Kenyon determined Jericho existed before 7000 BC. Although less than 4 hectares (10 acres), it was a well\-developed city. It had an impressive wall 1\.8 meters (6 feet) thick. It also had a round stone tower almost 9 meters (30 feet) high with a staircase inside from top to bottom.

Jericho seems to be 3,000 years older than other Canaanite cities. Most of the great Sumerian cities like Ur, Ish, Lagah, and Uruk came later. They originated in the fourth or early third millennium BC.

Location and Name
-----------------

### Topographical Necessities

There were four primary considerations in the selection of a site for a city:

1. *Security*. The topography (terrain or location) of the ancient city must contribute to its defense. A city built on a natural hill tended to be less vulnerable than one built in the valley. Defenders had a substantial advantage if an enemy had to attack on an incline.

    The location of Jerusalem illustrates the importance of a secure location. Higher mountains surround it ([Psalm 125:2](https://ref.ly/Ps125:2)). They first established Jerusalem on a limestone ridge. On the east the deep Kidron Valley protected it. On the west was the impressive Tyropoean Valley. The two valleys met, providing Jerusalem with protection from the south. To complete the security, they constructed walls around the city. They focused on the northern side, otherwise this would expose Jerusalem (compare [2 Samuel 5:6](https://ref.ly/2Sam5:6)).

2. *Water*. There was one absolute necessity for the existence of a city. This was a water source located in a convenient place. The city spring or well became the center of social communication. This was most true for the women. They were the usual water carriers. There are many Biblical examples of socializing at the village well ([Genesis 29:1–12](https://ref.ly/Gen29:1-Gen29:12); [1 Kings 1:38–39](https://ref.ly/1Kgs1:38-1Kgs1:39)).

    In general, valleys were the source for water. So the nearest spring to a city was often outside the walls. An attacking enemy might seize the water source. The water supply stored inside the city walls could run dry. This could cause a city to surrender. In Jerusalem, King Hezekiah constructed a water tunnel. He made it to neutralize the impending attack of the Assyrian king Sennacherib ([2 Kings 20:20](https://ref.ly/2Kgs20:20); [2 Chronicles 32:30](https://ref.ly/2Chr32:30)). It was an amazing accomplishment of engineering. The tunnel extended more than 518 meters (1,700 feet). Now over 2,500 years old, visitors to Jerusalem can still see it today.

3. *Food*. Every city needed enough food for those who lived there. Ancient farmers lived in a village or city. They walked each day to their fields. A city could only exist if there were enough farmable fields nearby to feed all the people.
4. *Trade.* A city must allow for importing raw materials and exporting finished products. Being close to local and international roads was desirable, if not a necessity. The important cities of the Bible were along primary roads of business.

The importance of these four factors has changed over time. When strong nations like Rome appeared, cities could rely on standing armies instead of being built on hard\-to\-reach hilltops. The development of plastered water tanks and aqueducts made it possible to build cities farther from natural water sources.For example, Caesarea, built by Herod the Great, was 19\.3 kilometers (12 miles) from the springs of Mount Carmel. Trade routes changed with shifting international conditions, causing some cities to decline while others grew.

*See also* Archaeology and the Bible.

* **Associated Passages:** GEN 4:2; GEN 4:12; GEN 4:17; GEN 4:20; GEN 4:21; GEN 4:22; JOS 19:35; 2SA 5:6; 2KI 20:20; 2CH 32:30; PSA 125:2; HEB 11:10; LEV 25:29–LEV 25:31; GEN 4:1–GEN 4:26; GEN 29:1–GEN 29:12; 1KI 1:38–1KI 1:39
* **Associated Articles:** Archaeology and the Bible (ID: `3713@TyndaleBibleDictionary`)

