# Aquifer Open Bible Dictionary

**Tyndale Open Bible Dictionary: Aquifer Edition**

This work is an adaptation of *Tyndale Open Bible Dictionary* © 2023 Tyndale House Publishers, licensed under the CC BY\-SA 4\.0 license. The adaptation, *Aquifer Open Bible Dictionary*, was created by BiblioNexus and is also licensed under CC BY\-SA 4\.0\.

This resource has been adapted into multiple languages, including English, Tok Pisin, Arabic (عربي), French (Français), Hindi (हिंदी), Indonesian (Bahasa Indonesia), Portuguese (Português), Russian (Русский), Spanish (Español), Swahili (Kiswahili), and Simplified Chinese (简体中文).



--------------------------------

## Civil Law and Justice (id: 4579)

CIVIL LAW AND JUSTICE
=====================

Civil law deals with private disputes between individuals, such as those about debt, divorce, inheritance, or other relationships. Criminal law, on the other hand, deals with crimes like murder, treason, or theft. In civil cases, the guilty party must compensate the victim appropriately.

This distinction between civil and criminal law is very different from biblical thinking. Almost all offenses were handled by private prosecution. If someone was murdered, their relatives were responsible for killing the murderer or chasing him to the nearest city of refuge for a trial. 

In Israel, all offenses had a religious dimension: theft or adultery was not only an offense against a neighbor but also a sin against God. This meant that every Israelite would be shocked by such behavior and would want it punished. If these acts continued, God might step in to punish the individual, their family, or even the whole nation. This religious aspect made every offense seem like a crime, even though most prosecutions were left to individuals.

*See also* Courts and Trials; Criminal Law and Punishment; Dietary Laws; Divorce; Divorce, Certificate of; Hammurabi, Law Code of; Law, Biblical Concept of; Leviticus, Book of; Marriage, Marriage Customs; Commandments, The Ten.

* **Associated Articles:** Commandments, the Ten (ID: `4618@TyndaleBibleDictionary`); Courts and Trials (ID: `4669@TyndaleBibleDictionary`); Criminal Law and Punishment (ID: `4693@TyndaleBibleDictionary`); Dietary Laws (ID: `4841@TyndaleBibleDictionary`); Divorce (ID: `4871@TyndaleBibleDictionary`); Certificate of Divorce (ID: `4870@TyndaleBibleDictionary`); Leviticus, Book of (ID: `6733@TyndaleBibleDictionary`); Hammurabi, Law Code of (ID: `5626@TyndaleBibleDictionary`); Biblical Concept of Law (ID: `6696@TyndaleBibleDictionary`); Marriage, Marriage Customs (ID: `6955@TyndaleBibleDictionary`)

