# Aquifer Open Bible Dictionary

**Tyndale Open Bible Dictionary: Aquifer Edition**

This work is an adaptation of *Tyndale Open Bible Dictionary* © 2023 Tyndale House Publishers, licensed under the CC BY\-SA 4\.0 license. The adaptation, *Aquifer Open Bible Dictionary*, was created by BiblioNexus and is also licensed under CC BY\-SA 4\.0\.

This resource has been adapted into multiple languages, including English, Tok Pisin, Arabic (عربي), French (Français), Hindi (हिंदी), Indonesian (Bahasa Indonesia), Portuguese (Português), Russian (Русский), Spanish (Español), Swahili (Kiswahili), and Simplified Chinese (简体中文).



--------------------------------

## Consumption (id: 4640)

CONSUMPTION
===========

A medical term that in the past referred to tuberculosis of the lungs (an infection caused by bacteria). The word "consumption" appears twice in the Bible ([Leviticus 26:16](https://ref.ly/Lev26:16); [Deuteronomy 28:22](https://ref.ly/Deut28:22), Revised Standard Version). However, it does not specifically mean tuberculosis. Instead, it refers to any long\-lasting disease that causes the body to waste away. This could include cancer, diarrhea, poor nutrition, malaria, kidney failure, and other health problems. In the Bible, consumption is listed as one of many medical conditions that would affect those who do not follow God's commandments.

*See also* Disease; Medicine and Medical Practice.

* **Associated Passages:** LEV 26:16; DEU 28:22
* **Associated Articles:** Disease (ID: `4860@TyndaleBibleDictionary`); Medicine and Medical Practice (ID: `7011@TyndaleBibleDictionary`)

