# Aquifer Open Bible Dictionary

**Tyndale Open Bible Dictionary: Aquifer Edition**

This work is an adaptation of *Tyndale Open Bible Dictionary* © 2023 Tyndale House Publishers, licensed under the CC BY\-SA 4\.0 license. The adaptation, *Aquifer Open Bible Dictionary*, was created by BiblioNexus and is also licensed under CC BY\-SA 4\.0\.

This resource has been adapted into multiple languages, including English, Tok Pisin, Arabic (عربي), French (Français), Hindi (हिंदी), Indonesian (Bahasa Indonesia), Portuguese (Português), Russian (Русский), Spanish (Español), Swahili (Kiswahili), and Simplified Chinese (简体中文).



--------------------------------

## Cyrus the Great (id: 4731)

CYRUS THE GREAT\*
=================

Persian king (559–530 BC) who founded the Achaemenid dynasty and the Persian Empire. Cyrus (II) was the son of Cambyses I (600–599 BC), who ruled the unified territories of Parshumash\-anshan and Parsa. Cyrus’s mother was Mandane, daughter of the Median king Astyages (585?–550 BC). The ancestor of the dynasty was Achaemenes. Cyrus succeeded his father and established himself in Pasargadae about 559 BC. Ambitious and daring, he aligned his kingdom with neighboring peoples and tribes into a solid block of Persian power, then revolted against Astyages of Media. When it became evident that Cyrus would win in the struggle to control Media, the troops of Astyages mutinied and deserted to Cyrus. When Cyrus conquered the Median kingdom, however, he came into conflict with Babylon, since the two kingdoms claimed much of the same territory.

Cyrus consolidated his power before fighting with Babylon. First, he conquered Asia Minor. Wealthy King Croesus of Lydia and the Lydians submitted to him. Then he overran the northern mountainous region between the Caspian Sea and the northwest corner of India.

By 539 BC, Cyrus was ready to move against Babylon. The Babylonian governor of Elam defected to Cyrus and joined his army. With a minimum of opposition, the armies of Cyrus entered the Babylonian capital in 539 BC. Nabonidus was taken prisoner but was treated with respect and mercy. Sixteen days later Cyrus himself entered the city, to the acclaim of many of its inhabitants.

Isaiah’s prophecy spoke of Cyrus as the Lord’s anointed ([Is 45:1](https://ref.ly/Isa45:1)). Israel regarded him as called and empowered by their God to free them. Under Cyrus, the Jews were allowed to rebuild Jerusalem and its temple ([44:28](https://ref.ly/Isa44:28)). Documents preserved in the OT state that in his first year in Babylon, Cyrus issued a decree permitting the reconstruction of the house of God at Jerusalem ([2 Chr 36:22–23](https://ref.ly/2Chr36:22-2Chr36:23); [Ezr 1:1–3](https://ref.ly/Ezra1:1-Ezra1:3); [6:2–5](https://ref.ly/Ezra6:2-Ezra6:5)). He also returned sacred vessels taken from the temple by Nebuchadnezzar. Biblical descriptions of the decree say nothing about rebuilding the city, but that would be in harmony with the king’s policy.

During excavations (1879–82\) at Babylon, archaeologist Hormuzd Rassam discovered a clay barrel inscription on which Cyrus told of taking the city and of his resulting policies. Isaiah and Chronicles reflect the content of the inscription, which says that captured peoples were allowed to return home and build sanctuaries to their own gods.

Nothing is known about the death of Cyrus. Accounts that have been preserved make it clear that he was killed in battle, but the statements are conflicting. Probably the Greek historian Herodotus is right in indicating that Cyrus died in a terrible disaster that destroyed the Persian army fighting the Massagetae. The tomb of Cyrus can still be seen at Pasargadae in Iran.

*See also* Cyrus Cylinder; Persia, Persians.

* **Associated Passages:** ISA 44:28; ISA 45:1; 2CH 36:22–2CH 36:23; EZR 1:1–EZR 1:3; EZR 6:2–EZR 6:5
* **Associated Articles:** Cyrus Cylinder (ID: `4730@TyndaleBibleDictionary`); Persia, Persians (ID: `7674@TyndaleBibleDictionary`)

