# Aquifer Open Bible Dictionary

**Tyndale Open Bible Dictionary: Aquifer Edition**

This work is an adaptation of *Tyndale Open Bible Dictionary* © 2023 Tyndale House Publishers, licensed under the CC BY\-SA 4\.0 license. The adaptation, *Aquifer Open Bible Dictionary*, was created by BiblioNexus and is also licensed under CC BY\-SA 4\.0\.

This resource has been adapted into multiple languages, including English, Tok Pisin, Arabic (عربي), French (Français), Hindi (हिंदी), Indonesian (Bahasa Indonesia), Portuguese (Português), Russian (Русский), Spanish (Español), Swahili (Kiswahili), and Simplified Chinese (简体中文).



--------------------------------

## Dalmanutha (id: 4738)

DALMANUTHA
==========

An area on the west side of the Sea of Galilee near the southern end of the land of Gennesaret. Its exact location is not certain. Jesus and his disciples stayed there for a short time after the feeding of the 4,000 ([Mark 8:10](https://ref.ly/Mark8:10)). The Pharisees came to him seeking a sign from heaven to test Jesus. After his answer that no sign would be given to this generation ([Mark 8:12](https://ref.ly/Mark8:12)), he departed from there.

The word “Dalmanutha” is present in the best and oldest copies of the Bible. Some other sources use the names Magadan or Magdala. Matthew's version of this story in [Matthew 15:39](https://ref.ly/Matt15:39) uses the name Magadan. Because of this, the exact name and location have been difficult to identify. Probably the different names are meant to identify the same location or at least two places in the same area.

*See also* Magadan; Magdala.

* **Associated Passages:** MAT 15:39; MRK 8:10; MRK 8:12
* **Associated Articles:** Magadan (ID: `6847@TyndaleBibleDictionary`); Magdala (ID: `6849@TyndaleBibleDictionary`)

