# Aquifer Open Bible Dictionary

**Tyndale Open Bible Dictionary: Aquifer Edition**

This work is an adaptation of *Tyndale Open Bible Dictionary* © 2023 Tyndale House Publishers, licensed under the CC BY\-SA 4\.0 license. The adaptation, *Aquifer Open Bible Dictionary*, was created by BiblioNexus and is also licensed under CC BY\-SA 4\.0\.

This resource has been adapted into multiple languages, including English, Tok Pisin, Arabic (عربي), French (Français), Hindi (हिंदी), Indonesian (Bahasa Indonesia), Portuguese (Português), Russian (Русский), Spanish (Español), Swahili (Kiswahili), and Simplified Chinese (简体中文).



--------------------------------

## Damascus (id: 4742)

DAMASCUS
========

Syrian oasis city protected on three sides by mountains and situated on trade routes about 160 miles (257 kilometers) northeast of Jerusalem. The name Damascus can also refer to the surrounding area and to the southern Syrian state. Though close to the desert, the district is rich in almonds, apricots, cotton, flax, grains, hemp, olives, pistachios, pomegranates, tobacco, vineyards, and walnuts. These crops grow well because the land is watered by two rivers: the Nahr Barada, “the Cool” (biblical Abana), which runs from the northwest mountains through a deep ravine to the city; and the Nahr el\-A waj, “the Crooked” (biblical Pharpar), which flows west to east. Together the two rivers irrigate 400 square miles (643\.6 square kilometers) of land. Their beauty and importance in biblical times is conveyed by the haughty words of Naaman, a resident of the area, who almost refused to wash his leprosy away in the Jordan, as Elisha had prescribed, because it was such a poor river in comparison with the Abana and Pharpar ([2 Kgs 5](https://ref.ly/2Kgs5:1-2Kgs5:27)).

Of the several trade routes that converged in the area, one led to Tyre and down the Mediterranean coastline, another to Megiddo and eventually to Memphis and Egypt, and a third to the Gulf of Aqaba.

The first biblical mention of Damascus ([Gn 14:15](https://ref.ly/Gen14:15)) refers to the city in connection with Abraham’s successful attack upon the confederation of kings who kidnapped Lot and his family. The Bible does not refer to the city again until the time of David (c. 1000 BC).

Israel occupied a strategic position along the trade routes between Mesopotamia and Egypt. Although in the time of Joshua and the judges Israel was in conflict with its immediate neighbors, the Amorites, Moabites, Philistines, Ammonites, and Midianites, there was relatively little opposition from Syria.

By the time of Saul, Zobah, an Aramean kingdom to the north of Damascus, was menacing the Israelites. Damascus was possibly in alliance with Zobah at this time, and the Israelites fought a defensive action ([1 Sm 14:47](https://ref.ly/1Sam14:47)). David subsequently defeated Hadadezer of Zobah and gained control over southern Syria and Damascus, where he garrisoned his troops. David’s forces under Joab continued to be successful, and tribute was sent from Damascus to Israel. One of Hadadezer’s officers, Rezon, deserted and formed a guerilla band in the Damascus area. Subsequently, in Solomon’s reign he eroded even the Israelites’ economic control of the region and set himself up as king in Damascus around 940 BC ([1 Kgs 11:23–25](https://ref.ly/1Kgs11:23-1Kgs11:25)).

In the reign of Ben\-hadad I, about 883–843 BC, soldiers from Damascus besieged Samaria and sent reasonable terms to Ahab, which were accepted swiftly. Damascus was at the height of its power when Ben\-hadad was campaigning successfully against the Assyrians. At this time, when Jehoram, Ahab’s son, was king of Israel, Naaman the leper, a Syrian captain, was healed by the prophet Elisha when he accepted humbly the prescribed cure.

The strategy of overcoming the kingdom by killing the king had been successful for Ben\-hadad in his fight with Ahab, and he continued to follow the same policy. Shortly afterward, in a further effort to subdue Samaria, he sent assassination squads to murder either Jehoram or the prophet Elisha. The Lord preserved the lives of the pursued, and the Syrian attacked without success. Several years later, Elisha, who had gained the respect of the Syrians, entered Damascus boldly and announced that Ben\-hadad’s illness was not fatal but that his death was imminent. Ben\-hadad was thereafter murdered by Hazael, who then succeeded him. Although Damascus was soundly defeated by Assyria about 838 BC, Hazael rebounded quickly, and by 830 BC other predictions of Elisha were fulfilled. Damascene troops then controlled large areas of Palestinian territory, and the temple treasure was used to bribe the Syrians and save Jerusalem ([2 Kgs 12:17–18](https://ref.ly/2Kgs12:17-2Kgs12:18)).

Planning to continue the subjection of Israel, Ben\-hadad II found himself having to contend instead with resumed attacks from Assyria. In 803 BC Damascus became a tributary of Assyria, but the northern forces were unable to hold the area. After a further campaign in which Assyria again proved dominant, a weakened Damascus was unable to quash an Israelite rebellion in 795 BC. By the time of Jeroboam II, the Damascenes were forced to pay tribute to Samaria ([2 Kgs 14:28](https://ref.ly/2Kgs14:28)).

About 738 BC the Syrians, led by their new leader Rezin, joined forces with Pekah, king of Israel, to subjugate Judah. Much land was captured, although their siege of Jerusalem was unsuccessful ([2 Kgs 16:5–6](https://ref.ly/2Kgs16:5-2Kgs16:6); [2 Chr 28:5](https://ref.ly/2Chr28:5)). At this time of seeming success for Damascus, the city’s doom was predicted by Isaiah ([Is 8:4](https://ref.ly/Isa8:4); [17:1](https://ref.ly/Isa17:1)), Amos ([Am 1:3–5](https://ref.ly/Amos1:3-Amos1:5)), and Jeremiah ([Jer 49:23–27](https://ref.ly/Jer49:23-Jer49:27)). Rejecting God, Ahaz of Judah turned for protection to an alliance with the Assyrians, whom he bribed with the temple treasure. The Assyrian king Tiglath\-pileser III (“Pul”) agreed and marched against the Syro\-Israelite confederation. After defeating Israel, he attacked Damascus, plundered the city, deported the population, and replaced them with foreigners from other captured lands. Damascus was no longer an independent city\-state.

Due to its key location, Damascus remained important, and the Assyrians used the city as a provincial capital. Their records mention it in 727, 720, and 694 BC, and also in the days of Ashurbanipal (669–663 BC). Assyrian world dominance succumbed to that of Neo\-Babylon, which was later replaced by that of Medo\-Persia. During the period of Persian control, Damascus was a noted administrative center. Under the regime of Alexander the Great, the importance of Damascus was diminished by the rise in commercial significance of Antioch.

During intertestamental times, Damascus passed from one ruler to another. Following the death of Alexander, the city was controlled by the Ptolemies of Egypt and the Seleucids of Babylon. Somewhat before 100 BC, Syria was divided, with Damascus becoming the capital of Coele\-Syria. Its non\-Syrian kings were constantly in trouble at home with the economy and abroad with the Parthians, Hasmoneans, and Nabateans, who under Aretas controlled Damascus from 84 to 72 BC. Subsequently, authority passed to the Hasmoneans, descendants of the Maccabees, and then the Idumeans (the Herods). The area was subjected to Roman dominance after the defeat of Syria by the Romans in 65 BC.

Shortly after the death of Christ, the Nabateans regained control of the area, ruling Damascus from Petra through an ethnarch. It was under the control of an Arab appointee, probably Aretas IV, when Saul of Tarsus sought Jewish authority to purge Damascus of its Christians ([2 Cor 11:32](https://ref.ly/2Cor11:32)). Luke’s report in [Acts 9](https://ref.ly/Acts9:1-Acts9:43), corroborated by Paul’s own confession ([Acts 22:5–21](https://ref.ly/Acts22:5-Acts22:21); [26:11–23](https://ref.ly/Acts26:11-Acts26:23)), relates Saul’s vision, blinding, and subsequent conversion on the road to Damascus. This may have been close to the place where Syrian soldiers were blinded when planning to assassinate Elisha ([2 Kgs 6:18–23](https://ref.ly/2Kgs6:18-2Kgs6:23)). After Saul’s sight was restored in a house on the street called “Straight,” he preached Christianity. Apparently the uproar in the Jewish quarter concerning his preaching was so great that the ethnarch was willing to condone Saul’s murder by orthodox Jews. [Acts 9:23–25](https://ref.ly/Acts9:23-Acts9:25) describes his escape to Jerusalem. Damascus is not mentioned thereafter in biblical history.

*See also* Syria, Syrians.

* **Associated Passages:** GEN 14:15; 1SA 14:47; 2KI 14:28; 2CH 28:5; ISA 8:4; ISA 17:1; 2CO 11:32; ACT 9:1–ACT 9:43; 2KI 5:1–2KI 5:27; 1KI 11:23–1KI 11:25; 2KI 12:17–2KI 12:18; 2KI 16:5–2KI 16:6; AMO 1:3–AMO 1:5; JER 49:23–JER 49:27; ACT 22:5–ACT 22:21; ACT 26:11–ACT 26:23; 2KI 6:18–2KI 6:23; ACT 9:23–ACT 9:25
* **Associated Articles:** Syria, Syrians (ID: `8685@TyndaleBibleDictionary`)

