# Aquifer Open Bible Dictionary

**Tyndale Open Bible Dictionary: Aquifer Edition**

This work is an adaptation of *Tyndale Open Bible Dictionary* © 2023 Tyndale House Publishers, licensed under the CC BY\-SA 4\.0 license. The adaptation, *Aquifer Open Bible Dictionary*, was created by BiblioNexus and is also licensed under CC BY\-SA 4\.0\.

This resource has been adapted into multiple languages, including English, Tok Pisin, Arabic (عربي), French (Français), Hindi (हिंदी), Indonesian (Bahasa Indonesia), Portuguese (Português), Russian (Русский), Spanish (Español), Swahili (Kiswahili), and Simplified Chinese (简体中文).



--------------------------------

## Cornelius (id: 4654)

CORNELIUS
=========

Roman centurion and the first gentile Christian mentioned in the book of Acts.

The story of Cornelius’s conversion through the preaching of the apostle Peter is recorded in [Acts 10:1–11:18](https://ref.ly/Acts10:1-Acts11:18). Before his conversion, Cornelius was well known to the Jews as a person who feared God, prayed continually, and gave alms.

At first the church was composed only of Jews, who were reluctant to preach the gospel to Gentiles because law\-abiding Jews never had fellowship with “pagans.” Peter, a law\-abiding Jew, had scruples about entering a Gentile’s house and eating “unclean” food. Through a vision, however, God led Peter to Cornelius’s house to preach the gospel to him and his family and close friends. Before Peter had finished speaking, and before baptism or the laying on of hands could be administered, God dramatically demonstrated his acceptance of Gentiles into the fellowship of the church by giving them the gift of the Holy Spirit. Peter remained several days in Cornelius’s house, no doubt rejoicing in the centurion’s conversion and instructing him in his newfound faith.

Cornelius’s conversion represented a significant step in the separation of the early church from Judaism. Cornelius did not have to submit to any of the Jewish practices, such as circumcision or eating only ritually “clean” animals. For the first time a gentile believer was accepted into the church on equal terms with Jewish Christians.

*See also* Acts of the Apostles, Book of the.

* **Associated Passages:** ACT 10:1–ACT 11:18
* **Associated Articles:** Book of the Acts of the Apostles (ID: `3355@TyndaleBibleDictionary`)

