# Aquifer Open Bible Dictionary

**Tyndale Open Bible Dictionary: Aquifer Edition**

This work is an adaptation of *Tyndale Open Bible Dictionary* © 2023 Tyndale House Publishers, licensed under the CC BY\-SA 4\.0 license. The adaptation, *Aquifer Open Bible Dictionary*, was created by BiblioNexus and is also licensed under CC BY\-SA 4\.0\.

This resource has been adapted into multiple languages, including English, Tok Pisin, Arabic (عربي), French (Français), Hindi (हिंदी), Indonesian (Bahasa Indonesia), Portuguese (Português), Russian (Русский), Spanish (Español), Swahili (Kiswahili), and Simplified Chinese (简体中文).



--------------------------------

## Cypress (id: 4726)

CYPRESS
=======

The cypress tree is known for its dark leaves and symmetrical shape. It was used in Solomon's temple ([1 Kings 5:8](https://ref.ly/1Kgs5:8)).

The cypress (*Cupressus sempervirens horizontalis*) is a massive, tall\-growing evergreen tree with small, scale\-like leaves. It grows widely in the mountainous regions of Israel and the surrounding areas. On Mount Lebanon and Mount Hermon, it grows together with cedar and oak trees. Cypress trees usually grow 15\.2 to 18\.3 meters (50 to 60 feet) tall, but can grow up to 24\.2 meters (80 feet) tall.

The Phoenicians, Cretans, and Greeks are said to have used cypress wood extensively in building ships. Most scholars agree that the "gopher wood" mentioned in [Genesis 6:14](https://ref.ly/Gen6:14) is cypress because the wood lasts a very long time without rotting. Noah used this wood to build the an extremely large boat (the ark).

* **Associated Passages:** 1KI 5:8
* **Associated Articles:** Plants (ID: `7761@Unknown`)

