# Aquifer Open Bible Dictionary

**Tyndale Open Bible Dictionary: Aquifer Edition**

This work is an adaptation of *Tyndale Open Bible Dictionary* © 2023 Tyndale House Publishers, licensed under the CC BY\-SA 4\.0 license. The adaptation, *Aquifer Open Bible Dictionary*, was created by BiblioNexus and is also licensed under CC BY\-SA 4\.0\.

This resource has been adapted into multiple languages, including English, Tok Pisin, Arabic (عربي), French (Français), Hindi (हिंदी), Indonesian (Bahasa Indonesia), Portuguese (Português), Russian (Русский), Spanish (Español), Swahili (Kiswahili), and Simplified Chinese (简体中文).



--------------------------------

## Cummin (id: 4707)

CUMIN
=====

A herb from the carrot family that is grown for its fragrant seeds. The seeds are used for seasoning food ([Isaiah 28:25–27](https://ref.ly/Isa28:25-Isa28:27); [Matthew 23:23](https://ref.ly/Matt23:23)).

Cumin (*Cuminum cyminum*) is believed to be native to Egypt and the eastern Mediterranean region. People have grown cumin for a long time to harvest its strongly aromatic and sharp\-tasting seeds.

Cumin seeds are similar to caraway seeds but larger. They do not taste as pleasant as caraway seeds, but were still used widely as a flavor or spice. Sometimes people even mixed cumin with flour when making bread. Besides being used in cooking, people also used cumin as medicine and as a seasoning with fish and meats.

*See* Food and Food Preparation.

* **Associated Passages:** MAT 23:23; ISA 28:25–ISA 28:27
* **Associated Articles:** Food and Food Preparation (ID: `5286@TyndaleBibleDictionary`); Plants (ID: `7761@Unknown`)

