# Aquifer Open Bible Dictionary

**Tyndale Open Bible Dictionary: Aquifer Edition**

This work is an adaptation of *Tyndale Open Bible Dictionary* © 2023 Tyndale House Publishers, licensed under the CC BY\-SA 4\.0 license. The adaptation, *Aquifer Open Bible Dictionary*, was created by BiblioNexus and is also licensed under CC BY\-SA 4\.0\.

This resource has been adapted into multiple languages, including English, Tok Pisin, Arabic (عربي), French (Français), Hindi (हिंदी), Indonesian (Bahasa Indonesia), Portuguese (Português), Russian (Русский), Spanish (Español), Swahili (Kiswahili), and Simplified Chinese (简体中文).



--------------------------------

## Didache (Teaching) (id: 4838)

DIDACHE (Teaching)
==================

A manual of church discipline, otherwise known as “The Teaching of the Lord to the Gentiles through the Twelve Apostles.” 

Where Did the Didache Come From?
--------------------------------

Its origin and date are difficult to determine precisely. Scholars generally agree that the author wrote it in Syria or Palestine during the late first or early second century. The practices described in the manual were established much earlier. The Didache (which means “teaching”) was compiled from various sources that detail the traditions of well\-established church communities.

What Does the Didache Teach?
----------------------------

This handbook contains several texts intended to instruct new converts in the Christian faith. 

### The "Two Ways" of Life and Death

Chapters 1–6 present the “Two Ways” of life and death. They are based on [Deuteronomy 30:15](https://ref.ly/Deut30:15). This section resembles many Jewish teachings. It may find its source in the apocalyptic writings of the Qumran community (where the Dead Sea Scrolls were compiled). The manual also contains several parallels with the Epistle of Barnabas and the Shepherd of Hermas. These first chapters include a distinctly Christian collection of sayings that resemble Jesus’s teachings about loving one’s neighbor (as recorded by Matthew and Luke).

### Instructions for Christian Practices

Chapters 7–10 contain instructions for baptism, fasting, prayer, and the Eucharist (the sharing of bread and wine, also known as Holy Communion). For example:

* Converts should be baptized “in the name of the Father, Son, and Holy Spirit.”
* Converts should fast on Wednesdays and Fridays, in contrast with the Jews who fasted on Mondays and Thursdays.
* The converts should recite the Lord’s Prayer (with the doxology) daily.

The prayers in chapters 9 and 10 are based on Jewish table prayers. It is not clear whether they are meant for the Eucharist or for a common church meal (sometimes called a “love feast”). The prayers contain no references to the words of Jesus at the Last Supper. They place the blessing of the cup before the blessing of the bread (compare [1 Corinthians 10:16](https://ref.ly/1Cor10:16)). The Didache does note that believers are not required to use these model prayers.

### Instructions for Church Leadership

Chapters 11–15 give instructions for church leadership. These chapters discuss the marks of true apostles and prophets. They are referred to as “high priests.” These chapters also discuss the church’s responsibilities toward these leaders. The Didache ends with a prediction of the imminent return of Christ.

Why Is the Didache Important to Christian History?
--------------------------------------------------

The Jewishness of the Didache may reflect the influence of the Jerusalem church’s teachings. The description of church leadership seems to come from Paul. He details the roles of apostles, prophets, and teachers in 1 Corinthians. The Didache also stresses the function of the prophets. 

The teachings of the Didache reflect those of a church in the developmental stages of its institutions and practices. The church still appears to be developing characteristics that clearly distinguish it from Judaism. The Didache was popular in the early church. Eusebius listed it with the orthodox writings that were eventually excluded from the New Testament canon.

* **Associated Passages:** DEU 30:15; 1CO 10:16

