# Aquifer Open Bible Dictionary

**Tyndale Open Bible Dictionary: Aquifer Edition**

This work is an adaptation of *Tyndale Open Bible Dictionary* © 2023 Tyndale House Publishers, licensed under the CC BY\-SA 4\.0 license. The adaptation, *Aquifer Open Bible Dictionary*, was created by BiblioNexus and is also licensed under CC BY\-SA 4\.0\.

This resource has been adapted into multiple languages, including English, Tok Pisin, Arabic (عربي), French (Français), Hindi (हिंदी), Indonesian (Bahasa Indonesia), Portuguese (Português), Russian (Русский), Spanish (Español), Swahili (Kiswahili), and Simplified Chinese (简体中文).



--------------------------------

## Dropsy (id: 4900)

DROPSY
======

An old medical term for an excess of watery fluid in any tissue or space of the body. 

Dropsy, mentioned in [Luke 14:2](https://ref.ly/Luke14:2), is a symptom of serious disorders, like heart, kidney, or liver disease. Jesus healed a man "who had dropsy," but his illness is not described. The word "dropsy" is now outdated. It has been replaced with more specific medical terms:

* Dropsy in the stomach is now called *ascites*
* Dropsy in or below the skin is called *edema*
* Dropsy in the lungs is now called *hydrothorax*

Dropsy is not mentioned directly in the Old Testament. A reference to swollen feet ([Deuteronomy 8:4](https://ref.ly/Deut8:4)) could refer to *pedal edema* or simply to blisters.

*See also* Medicine and Medical Practice.

* **Associated Passages:** DEU 8:4; LUK 14:2
* **Associated Articles:** Medicine and Medical Practice (ID: `7011@TyndaleBibleDictionary`)

