# Aquifer Open Bible Dictionary

**Tyndale Open Bible Dictionary: Aquifer Edition**

This work is an adaptation of *Tyndale Open Bible Dictionary* © 2023 Tyndale House Publishers, licensed under the CC BY\-SA 4\.0 license. The adaptation, *Aquifer Open Bible Dictionary*, was created by BiblioNexus and is also licensed under CC BY\-SA 4\.0\.

This resource has been adapted into multiple languages, including English, Tok Pisin, Arabic (عربي), French (Français), Hindi (हिंदी), Indonesian (Bahasa Indonesia), Portuguese (Português), Russian (Русский), Spanish (Español), Swahili (Kiswahili), and Simplified Chinese (简体中文).



--------------------------------

## Dothan (id: 4889)

DOTHAN
======

Ancient city located about 60 miles (97 kilometers) north of Jerusalem, 13 miles (21 kilometers) north of the city of Samaria, and about 5 miles (8 kilometers) southeast of Megiddo. The two cities of En\-gannim (modern Jenin) and Ibleam guarded a narrow pass on the road leading to Dothan and on to the coastal plain.

The mound of Tell Dotha, site of Dothan, rises 200 feet (61 meters) above the surrounding plain to a height of 1,200 feet (365\.6 meters) above sea level. The top of the mound comprises some 10 acres (4 hectares). From there one can look out upon fertile land boasting good crops. Flocks pasture here as they did in biblical times, drawn to the area in part by the adequate water supplied by its springs.

Dothan was the place where Joseph’s brothers sold him to a caravan of Ishmaelites ([Gn 37](https://ref.ly/Gen37:1-Gen37:36)). A millennium later the city was surrounded by Syrian forces in an attempt to capture Elisha, who lived there and who was thought to be betraying the Syrian plans to the Israelite king ([2 Kgs 6:8–14](https://ref.ly/2Kgs6:8-2Kgs6:14)). Dothan was mentioned also in the lists of places conquered by Pharaoh Thutmose III and, in the intertestamental period, in connection with the military campaigns of Holofernes.

* **Associated Passages:** GEN 37:1–GEN 37:36; 2KI 6:8–2KI 6:14

