# Aquifer Open Bible Dictionary

**Tyndale Open Bible Dictionary: Aquifer Edition**

This work is an adaptation of *Tyndale Open Bible Dictionary* © 2023 Tyndale House Publishers, licensed under the CC BY\-SA 4\.0 license. The adaptation, *Aquifer Open Bible Dictionary*, was created by BiblioNexus and is also licensed under CC BY\-SA 4\.0\.

This resource has been adapted into multiple languages, including English, Tok Pisin, Arabic (عربي), French (Français), Hindi (हिंदी), Indonesian (Bahasa Indonesia), Portuguese (Português), Russian (Русский), Spanish (Español), Swahili (Kiswahili), and Simplified Chinese (简体中文).



--------------------------------

## Elealeh (id: 4978)

ELEALEH
=======

Elealeh was a town located across the Jordan River to the northeast of Heshbon. The tribes of Reuben and Gad conquered this town ([Numbers 32:3, 37](https://ref.ly/Num32:3,Num32:37)). Later, the Moabites took control of Elealeh again. The prophets mentioned Elealeh together with Heshbon when they spoke against Moab ([Isaiah 15:4](https://ref.ly/Isa15:4); [16:9](https://ref.ly/Isa16:9); [Jeremiah 48:34](https://ref.ly/Jer48:34)).

Eusebius, a church historian who lived in the fourth century AD, described Elealeh as a large village. Scholars identify Elealeh with the modern village of el\-'Al. This village is 910\.1 meters ( 2,986 feet) above sea level in an area known for growing many grapes. Archaeologists have found the remains of walls dating back to the time before the patriarchs (Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob) lived.

* **Associated Passages:** NUM 32:3; NUM 32:37; ISA 15:4; ISA 16:9; JER 48:34

