# Aquifer Open Bible Dictionary

**Tyndale Open Bible Dictionary: Aquifer Edition**

This work is an adaptation of *Tyndale Open Bible Dictionary* © 2023 Tyndale House Publishers, licensed under the CC BY\-SA 4\.0 license. The adaptation, *Aquifer Open Bible Dictionary*, was created by BiblioNexus and is also licensed under CC BY\-SA 4\.0\.

This resource has been adapted into multiple languages, including English, Tok Pisin, Arabic (عربي), French (Français), Hindi (हिंदी), Indonesian (Bahasa Indonesia), Portuguese (Português), Russian (Русский), Spanish (Español), Swahili (Kiswahili), and Simplified Chinese (简体中文).



--------------------------------

## Elohim (id: 5042)

ELOHIM
======

A general name for God in the Old Testament. The origin of the word Elohim is not certain, but most scholars agree that it comes from a root word meaning "might" or "power." The word is plural in form, but when it refers to the true God, it is used as singular and most often with singular verbs. The most common explanation for why Elohim is plural when applied to God is that it is a "plural of majesty," which means all of God's greatness and power are included in this name.

**Elohim** is a word related to names for deities in other ancient languages, such as Assyrian and Ugaritic. In the Old Testament, it can sometimes refer to the gods of other nations, showing its broader meaning as a term for divine beings. In the Old Testament, especially in the first five books (Genesis through Deuteronomy), Elohim seems to be used in a general way to show God's greatness and his role as creator of the universe. This is somewhat different from the name Yahweh, which usually refers to God in his personal relationships with people.

Elohim is also used as a title for Israel's rulers and judges([Psalm 82:1, 6](https://ref.ly/Ps82:1,Ps82:6)). It may refer to their role as God's representatives on earth ([Exodus 21:6](https://ref.ly/Exod21:6)). Jesus used this meaning of the word in [John 10:34–36](https://ref.ly/John10:34-John10:36) when defending himself against his critics.

The word is also used to describe angels ([Psalm 8:5](https://ref.ly/Ps8:5), in the King James Version; compare [Hebrews 2:7](https://ref.ly/Heb2:7)) and in the phrase “sons of God” ([Job 1:6](https://ref.ly/Job1:6)).

*See also* God, Names of.

* **Associated Passages:** EXO 21:6; JOB 1:6; PSA 8:5; PSA 82:1; PSA 82:6; HEB 2:7; JHN 10:34–JHN 10:36
* **Associated Articles:** God, Names of (ID: `5499@TyndaleBibleDictionary`)

