# Aquifer Open Bible Dictionary

**Tyndale Open Bible Dictionary: Aquifer Edition**

This work is an adaptation of *Tyndale Open Bible Dictionary* © 2023 Tyndale House Publishers, licensed under the CC BY\-SA 4\.0 license. The adaptation, *Aquifer Open Bible Dictionary*, was created by BiblioNexus and is also licensed under CC BY\-SA 4\.0\.

This resource has been adapted into multiple languages, including English, Tok Pisin, Arabic (عربي), French (Français), Hindi (हिंदी), Indonesian (Bahasa Indonesia), Portuguese (Português), Russian (Русский), Spanish (Español), Swahili (Kiswahili), and Simplified Chinese (简体中文).



--------------------------------

## Elijah (id: 5011)

ELIJAH
======

1\. Ninth\-century BC prophet of Israel. Elijah’s name means “my God is the Lord”—appropriate for a stalwart opponent of Baal worship. The Scriptures give no information regarding his family background except that he was a Tishbite who probably came from the land of Gilead on the east bank of the Jordan River. He lived primarily during the reigns of kings Ahab (874–853 BC) and Ahaziah (853–852 BC) of Israel. The biblical account of Elijah runs from [1 Kings 17](https://ref.ly/1Kgs17:1-1Kgs17:24) to [2 Kings 2](https://ref.ly/2Kgs2:1-2Kgs2:25).

Elijah was called by God at a critical period in Israel’s life. Economically and politically the northern kingdom was in its strongest position since its separation from the southern kingdom. Omri (885–874 BC) had initiated a policy of trade and friendly relations with the Phoenicians. To show his good faith, Omri gave his son Ahab in marriage to Jezebel, the daughter of Ethbaal, king of Tyre. She brought Baal worship with her to Israel, a false religion whose rapid spread soon threatened the kingdom’s very existence. Elijah was sent to turn the nation and its leaders back to the Lord through his prophetic message and miracles.

Warning of Drought
------------------

Elijah began his recorded ministry by telling Ahab that the nation would suffer a drought until the prophet himself announced its end ([1 Kgs 17:1](https://ref.ly/1Kgs17:1)). He thus repeated Moses’ warning ([Lv 26:14–39](https://ref.ly/Lev26:14-Lev26:39); [Dt 28:15–68](https://ref.ly/Deut28:15-Deut28:68)) of the consequences of turning away from God.

Elijah then hid himself in a ravine on the east bank of the Jordan River by the brook Cherith (possibly the valley of the Yarmuk River in north Gilead). There he had sufficient water for his needs, and ravens brought him food twice daily. When the brook dried up, Elijah was directed to move to the Phoenician village of Zarephath near Sidon. A widow took care of him from her scanty supplies, and her obedience to Elijah was rewarded by a miraculous supply of meal and oil that was not depleted until the drought ended.

While Elijah was staying with the widow, her son became ill and died. By the power of prayer, the child was restored to life and good health.

In the drought’s third year the Lord told Elijah to inform Ahab that God would soon provide rain for Israel. On his return, Elijah first encountered Ahab’s officer, Obadiah, who was searching for water for the king’s livestock. Elijah sent Obadiah to arrange a meeting with Ahab. At first Obadiah refused. For three years Ahab had searched Israel and the neighboring kingdoms in vain for the prophet, no doubt in order to force him to end the drought. Obadiah was certain that while he went to bring Ahab, Israel’s most wanted “outlaw” would elude them again, thus enraging the king. When Elijah promised him that he would stay until he returned, the officer arranged for Ahab to meet the prophet.

In the subsequent meeting Elijah rejected the king’s allegation that he was the “troubler of Israel” ([1 Kgs 18:17–18](https://ref.ly/1Kgs18:17-1Kgs18:18)). He was only obeying God, he insisted, in pointing out Ahab’s idolatry. Ahab had even permitted Jezebel to subsidize a school of Baal and Asherah prophets. Elijah then requested a public gathering on Mt Carmel as a contest between the prophets of Baal and the prophets of the Lord to determine who was the true God.

Confrontation on Carmel
-----------------------

One of the highlights of Elijah’s ministry was the contest on Mt Carmel. Ahab assembled all Israel along with 850 prophets of Baal and Asherah. The famous challenge was issued: “How long are you going to waver between two opinions? If the Lord is God, follow him! But if Baal is God, then follow him!” ([1 Kgs 18:21](https://ref.ly/1Kgs18:21), nlt). Sacrificial animals were to be placed on two altars, one for Baal and one for the Lord, and the prophets representing each were to ask for fire from their God.

All day long the pagan prophets called in vain on Baal. They danced a whirling, frenzied dance, cutting themselves with knives until their blood gushed. But there was no answer. Finally, Elijah’s turn came. He repaired the demolished altar of the Lord and prepared the sacrifice. For dramatic effect, he built a trench around the altar and poured water over the sacrifice until the trench overflowed. Then he said a brief prayer, and immediately fire fell from heaven and consumed the burnt offering, the wood, the stones, and the dust, and licked up the water that was in the trench ([1 Kgs 18:38](https://ref.ly/1Kgs18:38)).

When the people saw it, they fell on their faces in repentance, chanting, “The Lord is God! The Lord is God!” ([1 Kgs 18:39](https://ref.ly/1Kgs18:39)). At Elijah’s command the people seized the prophets of Baal and killed them by the brook Kishon. Then Elijah, at the top of Carmel, began to pray fervently for rain. Dramatically, the sky became black with clouds and rain began to pour, ending the long drought. Ahab rode back in his chariot to Jezreel, 20 miles (32\.2 kilometers) to the east. God’s Spirit enabled Elijah to outrun Ahab, and he arrived in Jezreel first.

Jezebel, furious over the massacre of the Baal prophets, sent a message to Elijah: “May the gods also kill me if by this time tomorrow I have failed to take your life like those whom you killed” ([1 Kgs 19:2](https://ref.ly/1Kgs19:2), nlt). When Elijah received her message, he panicked and fled to Beersheba.

Experience at Horeb
-------------------

Elijah left his servant in Beersheba, going another day’s journey into the desert alone. There he lay down under a broom tree and, in despair and exhaustion, asked God to take his life. Instead, an angel appeared, nourishing him twice with bread and water. After he had slept, Elijah continued on his way.

After 40 days, Elijah arrived at Mt Horeb, where he found shelter in a cave. There the Lord spoke to him, asking what he was doing there. The prophet explained that he was the only prophet of God left in Israel, and now even his life was threatened. In response, the mighty forces of nature—a great wind, an earthquake, and fire—were displayed before Elijah to show him that the omnipotent God could intercede on his behalf with a powerful hand. Finally God encouraged Elijah in a “still, small voice.” The Lord had further tasks for him to accomplish. God also told Elijah that he was not the only faithful person in Israel; 7,000 others remained true to the Lord.

Since Elijah had faithfully delivered God’s message to Ahab, the Lord commissioned him to deliver another message, one of judgment on Israel’s continuing failure to listen to God. The instruments of retribution were to be Hazael, who would become king in Syria (c. 893–796 BC), and Jehu, who would become king of Israel (841–814 BC). Elijah was instructed to anoint both of them. He was also told to anoint his successor, Elisha, to be his understudy until it was time for Elisha’s full ministry to begin.

Confrontation concerning Naboth
-------------------------------

After his return to Israel, one of Elijah’s boldest confrontations with King Ahab was over Naboth’s vineyard. Although Ahab wanted Naboth’s property, he was sensitive to the law regarding ownership of land. Further, Ahab never completely abandoned the faith of his fathers ([1 Kgs 21:27–29](https://ref.ly/1Kgs21:27-1Kgs21:29)). Jezebel, however, had no regard for the Mosaic law and conspired to have Naboth put to death on a false charge.

When Ahab then took possession of the vineyard, Elijah branded him as a murderer and a robber. He predicted divine judgment—the fall of Ahab’s dynasty and Jezebel’s horrible death ([1 Kgs 21:17–24](https://ref.ly/1Kgs21:17-1Kgs21:24)). Ahab repented, however, and the judgment was postponed.

Ahaziah’s Folly
---------------

The Lord’s judgment on Ahab was finally executed when the king was killed in a battle with Syria in 853 BC. The dogs licked up Ahab’s blood, as the prophet had predicted ([1 Kgs 21:19](https://ref.ly/1Kgs21:19)). Shortly after Ahaziah had succeeded his father as king, he suffered a crippling fall. While lying ill, he sent messengers to ask Baal\-zebub, the god of Ekron, whether he would recover. The Lord sent Elijah to intercept them and give them a message for the king: a rebuke for ignoring the God of Israel and a warning of the king’s impending death.

Ahaziah angrily sent a captain with 50 soldiers to arrest Elijah. They were consumed by fire from heaven at Elijah’s words. A second captain and another 50 soldiers were sent but met the same fate. The third captain who came begged the prophet to spare his and his soldiers’ lives. Elijah went with this captain and delivered God’s message to the king personally. The king would not recover but would die because he had inquired from pagan gods rather than from the true God.

Warning to Jehoram
------------------

Elijah had been called primarily to minister to Israel, but he also delivered God’s word of warning to Jehoram, king of Judah, rebuking him for following Israel in its idolatry and for not walking in the godly ways of his father and grandfather ([2 Chr 21:12–15](https://ref.ly/2Chr21:12-2Chr21:15)).

Elijah’s Ascent into Heaven
---------------------------

When the end of Elijah’s ministry drew near, Elisha refused to leave him. After a journey that took them to schools of the prophets at Bethel and Jericho, the two crossed the Jordan River miraculously; Elijah struck the waters with his mantle and they parted. Elisha requested a double portion (the firstborn’s share, cf. [Dt 21:17](https://ref.ly/Deut21:17)) of his master’s spirit, for he desired to be Elijah’s full successor. Elisha knew his request was granted because he saw Elijah pass into the heavens in a whirlwind bearing a chariot and horses of fire. The young prophets who had accompanied Elisha searched in vain for Elijah in the mountains and valleys around the Jordan; God had taken his faithful prophet home. Elijah thus joined Enoch as the only other man in the Bible who did not experience death.

Elijah’s Message and Miracles
-----------------------------

As the Baal worship of Tyre made inroads into Israel through Jezebel, Elijah was sent to check its spread by emphasizing again that Israel’s God was the only God of the whole earth. He began a vital work that was continued by Jehu, who slaughtered many of the Baal worshipers among Israel’s leaders ([2 Kgs 10:18–28](https://ref.ly/2Kgs10:18-2Kgs10:28)). Elijah’s specific mission was to destroy heathen worship in order to spare Israel, thus preparing the way for the prophets who were to follow in his spirit.

Miracles were prominent in Elijah’s ministry, given as a sign to confirm him as God’s spokesman and to turn Israel’s kings back to God. Some scholars have rejected these miracles or tried to explain them away. The OT, however, clearly testifies to their validity, and the NT affirms them.

Elijah and the New Testament
----------------------------

Malachi named Elijah as the forerunner of the “great and terrible day of the Lord” who will “turn the hearts of fathers to their children and the hearts of children to their fathers” ([Mal 4:5–6](https://ref.ly/Mal4:5-Mal4:6)). Jewish writers have often taken up the same theme in their literature: Elijah will “restore the tribes of Jacob” ([Ecclus 48:10](https://ref.ly/Sir48:10)); he is mentioned in the Qumran *Manual of Discipline* of the Dead Sea Scrolls; he is the central sign of the resurrection of the dead according to the Mishnah, the collection of Jewish oral law; and he is the subject of songs sung at the close of the Sabbath.

In the NT, Malachi’s prophecy was interpreted in the angelic annunciation to Zechariah as pointing to John the Baptist, who was to do the work of another Elijah ([Lk 1:17](https://ref.ly/Luke1:17), kjv “Elias”) and was confirmed by Jesus himself ([Mt 11:14](https://ref.ly/Matt11:14); [17:10–13](https://ref.ly/Matt17:10-Matt17:13)).

Jesus also alluded to Elijah’s sojourn in the land of Sidon ([Lk 4:25–26](https://ref.ly/Luke4:25-Luke4:26)), and the apostle Paul referred to the prophet’s experience at Mt Horeb ([Rom 11:2](https://ref.ly/Rom11:2)). The apostle James used Elijah to illustrate what it means to be a righteous man and a man of prayer ([Jas 5:17](https://ref.ly/Jas5:17)).

Elijah appeared again on the Mt of Transfiguration with Moses as they discussed Jesus’ approaching death ([Mt 17:1–13](https://ref.ly/Matt17:1-Matt17:13); [Lk 9:28–36](https://ref.ly/Luke9:28-Luke9:36)). Some Bible scholars believe that Elijah will return as one of the two witnesses of the end times ([Rv 11:3–12](https://ref.ly/Rev11:3-Rev11:12)), in fulfillment of Malachi’s prophecy that he is to come before the dreadful judgment day of God.

2\. Chief of Benjamin’s tribe ([1 Chr 8:27](https://ref.ly/1Chr8:27), kjv “Eliah”).

3\. Priest who married a gentile wife ([Ezr 10:21](https://ref.ly/Ezra10:21)).

4\. Layman who also married a foreign wife ([Ezr 10:26](https://ref.ly/Ezra10:26)).

* **Associated Passages:** DEU 21:17; 1KI 17:1; 1KI 18:21; 1KI 18:38; 1KI 18:39; 1KI 19:2; 1KI 21:19; 1CH 8:27; EZR 10:21; EZR 10:26; MAT 11:14; LUK 1:17; ROM 11:2; JAS 5:17; SIR 48:10; MAT 17:1–MAT 17:13; 1KI 21:17–1KI 21:24; 1KI 21:27–1KI 21:29; DEU 28:15–DEU 28:68; 1KI 17:1–1KI 17:24; 2KI 2:1–2KI 2:25; LEV 26:14–LEV 26:39; 1KI 18:17–1KI 18:18; 2CH 21:12–2CH 21:15; 2KI 10:18–2KI 10:28; MAL 4:5–MAL 4:6; MAT 17:10–MAT 17:13; LUK 4:25–LUK 4:26; LUK 9:28–LUK 9:36; REV 11:3–REV 11:12

