# Aquifer Open Bible Dictionary

**Tyndale Open Bible Dictionary: Aquifer Edition**

This work is an adaptation of *Tyndale Open Bible Dictionary* © 2023 Tyndale House Publishers, licensed under the CC BY\-SA 4\.0 license. The adaptation, *Aquifer Open Bible Dictionary*, was created by BiblioNexus and is also licensed under CC BY\-SA 4\.0\.

This resource has been adapted into multiple languages, including English, Tok Pisin, Arabic (عربي), French (Français), Hindi (हिंदी), Indonesian (Bahasa Indonesia), Portuguese (Português), Russian (Русский), Spanish (Español), Swahili (Kiswahili), and Simplified Chinese (简体中文).



--------------------------------

## Elect Lady (id: 4982)

ELECT LADY\*
============

Greeting found in [2 John 1:1](https://ref.ly/2John1:1). The phrase has been interpreted two ways.

Some interpreters regard 2 John as addressed to a particular woman. Ancient Greek manuscripts show that the word kuria (translated as “lady” or “mistress”) was used by letter writers as a personal term for family members or close friends of either sex. Thus, the phrase could be translated, “to my dear friend, Eklete.” Some scholars associate the elect lady with Martha of Bethany (whose name in Aramaic also means “mistress”).

Other interpreters regard the phrase as signifying a local congregation. John possibly portrayed this Christian community as a mother, the members as her children, and other congregations as sisters ([2 Jn 1:13](https://ref.ly/2John1:13); cf. [1 Pt 5:13](https://ref.ly/1Pet5:13)). The phrase could thus be translated, “the lady elect.”

*See also* John, Letters of.

* **Associated Passages:** 1PE 5:13; 2JN 1:1; 2JN 1:13
* **Associated Articles:** John, Letters of (ID: `6410@TyndaleBibleDictionary`)

