# Aquifer Open Bible Dictionary

**Tyndale Open Bible Dictionary: Aquifer Edition**

This work is an adaptation of *Tyndale Open Bible Dictionary* © 2023 Tyndale House Publishers, licensed under the CC BY\-SA 4\.0 license. The adaptation, *Aquifer Open Bible Dictionary*, was created by BiblioNexus and is also licensed under CC BY\-SA 4\.0\.

This resource has been adapted into multiple languages, including English, Tok Pisin, Arabic (عربي), French (Français), Hindi (हिंदी), Indonesian (Bahasa Indonesia), Portuguese (Português), Russian (Русский), Spanish (Español), Swahili (Kiswahili), and Simplified Chinese (简体中文).



--------------------------------

## Eschatology (id: 5140)

ESCHATOLOGY
===========

A branch of theology concerned with the study of the last things, or end times. These beliefs include:

* What happens when people die
* What happens when Jesus returns
* What the final future will be like for both individuals and the whole world

Topics of Eschatology
---------------------

### Death

The Bible teaches that all humans will die ([Hebrews 9:27](https://ref.ly/Heb9:27)). The only exceptions will be those who are still alive when Christ returns ([1 Thessalonians 4:17](https://ref.ly/1Thess4:17)). Physical death, or the “first death,” is the separation of the soul from the body. Because of the presence of sin in the world, everyone must die ([Romans 5:12](https://ref.ly/Rom5:12)).

### The Intermediate State

This refers to the condition of the person between the time of death and the resurrection. The traditional orthodox view is that believers experience a state of conscious bliss in the presence of the Lord. Unbelievers are tormented by separation from the presence of God. This, however, is a relatively incomplete state when compared with the final destiny of each. 

Some groups, such as Seventh\-Day Adventists, have held a belief in a type of “soul sleep,” or unconsciousness, between death and resurrection. Still others, notably Roman Catholics, believe in a place of purging in preparation for the future life.

### The Second Coming

Scripture teaches that at the end of time, Christ will return in a personal, bodily form ([Acts 1:11](https://ref.ly/Acts1:11)). No one knows exactly when this will occur, and it will consequently catch some by surprise, coming as a thief in the night ([Luke 12:39–40](https://ref.ly/Luke12:39-Luke12:40)). The time is unknown, but the fact that it will occur is very definite. Many of Jesus’s parables refer to this fact and to the appropriateness of alert, faithful, and intensive activity. [Matthew 24–25](https://ref.ly/Matt24:1-Matt25:46) provides a good example of this.

### The Resurrection

All who have died will come to life. This will be a bodily resurrection. This is a resumption of the bodily existence of each person. For believers, this will take place in connection with the second coming of Christ. The resurrection will involve the transformation of the body of this present flesh into a new, perfected body ([1 Corinthians 15:35–56](https://ref.ly/1Cor15:35-1Cor15:56)). The Bible also indicates a resurrection of unbelievers, unto eternal death ([John 5:28–29](https://ref.ly/John5:28-John5:29)).

### The Judgment

There will be a time of judgment in which the Lord will determine the spiritual condition of all who have lived. This is based on their relationship to him. Some will be sent off to everlasting reward and others to eternal punishment. Some theologians distinguish between the times when believers and unbelievers will be judged. Some see as many as seven different judgments occurring.

### Heaven and Hell

The Bible teaches the existence of heaven. Heaven is a place of eternal joy. It is where Christians are in the presence of God. The Bible also speaks of hell. Hell is also called Gehenna or the lake of fire. Hell is a state of tragic separation of unbelievers from the presence of God. These are fixed states that are determined by decisions made within this life.

### The Millennium

Many Christians believe there will be an earthly reign of Jesus Christ. This is called the Millennium. It immediately precedes the final judgment. This belief is based on [Revelation 20:4–7](https://ref.ly/Rev20:4-Rev20:7). There are three main views on the Millennium:

1. Premillennialists. They believe Christ will return personally to inaugurate this period.
2. Postmillennialists. They believe the kingdom will be established through the progressive successful preaching of the gospel.
3. Amillennialists: They do not believe that there will be any earthly reign of Christ at all. They interpret the 1,000 years of [Revelation 20](https://ref.ly/Rev20:1-Rev20:15) symbolically.

### The Great Tribulation

The Bible speaks of a time of great anguish or tribulation. This time will come upon the earth, exceeding anything that has ever occurred before. Some identify this with the 70th week of [Daniel 9:24–27\.](https://ref.ly/Dan9:24-Dan9:27) They believe it will be of seven years duration. Some believe the church will be present to experience this because the Lord will not return until the end of the period. These are termed posttribulationists. Others, known as pretribulationists, believe that the Lord’s second coming will be in two stages, or phases: 

1. Christ will come for his church to take the believers away before the great tribulation.
2. Christ will then make an open display of his glory before the whole world.

Still others, known as midtribulationists, believe that the church will be present for the first half of the seven years. The church will be removed before the severe part of the tribulation begins.

*See also* Apocalyptic; Day of the Lord; Death; Eternal Life; Heaven; Hell; Intermediate State; Judgment; Last Days; Last Judgment; Millennium; Resurrection; Second Coming of Christ; Daniel, Book of; Tribulation; Wrath of God.

* **Associated Passages:** ACT 1:11; ROM 5:12; 1TH 4:17; HEB 9:27; JHN 5:28–JHN 5:29; LUK 12:39–LUK 12:40; MAT 24:1–MAT 25:46; 1CO 15:35–1CO 15:56; REV 20:4–REV 20:7; REV 20:1–REV 20:15; DAN 9:24–DAN 9:27
* **Associated Articles:** Apocalyptic (ID: `3662@TyndaleBibleDictionary`); Book of Daniel (ID: `4746@TyndaleBibleDictionary`); Death (ID: `4783@TyndaleBibleDictionary`); Eternal Life (ID: `5165@TyndaleBibleDictionary`); Day of the Lord (ID: `4772@TyndaleBibleDictionary`); Heaven (ID: `5754@TyndaleBibleDictionary`); Judgment (ID: `6495@TyndaleBibleDictionary`); Resurrection (ID: `8011@TyndaleBibleDictionary`); Second Coming of Christ (ID: `8202@TyndaleBibleDictionary`); Intermediate State (ID: `6037@TyndaleBibleDictionary`); Millennium (ID: `7139@TyndaleBibleDictionary`); Last Days (ID: `6687@TyndaleBibleDictionary`); Last Judgment (ID: `6688@TyndaleBibleDictionary`); Hell (ID: `5789@TyndaleBibleDictionary`); Wrath of God (ID: `9095@TyndaleBibleDictionary`); Tribulation (ID: `8923@TyndaleBibleDictionary`)

