# Aquifer Open Bible Dictionary

**Tyndale Open Bible Dictionary: Aquifer Edition**

This work is an adaptation of *Tyndale Open Bible Dictionary* © 2023 Tyndale House Publishers, licensed under the CC BY\-SA 4\.0 license. The adaptation, *Aquifer Open Bible Dictionary*, was created by BiblioNexus and is also licensed under CC BY\-SA 4\.0\.

This resource has been adapted into multiple languages, including English, Tok Pisin, Arabic (عربي), French (Français), Hindi (हिंदी), Indonesian (Bahasa Indonesia), Portuguese (Português), Russian (Русский), Spanish (Español), Swahili (Kiswahili), and Simplified Chinese (简体中文).



--------------------------------

## Execration Texts (id: 5202)

EXECRATION TEXTS
================

Old Egyptian writings from around 2000 to 1800 BC (the Middle Kingdom period). They contain curses against the pharaoh's enemies. Archaeologists have found these texts on bowls from Thebes dating to the 20th to 19th centuries BC, and on figurines (small human figures) from Saqqara dating to the 19th to 18th centuries BC. The bowls or figurines were inscribed with names of rulers, cities, or persons, along with a curse. They were then ceremonially broken and given a ritual burial. This act symbolized the damage the curse was meant to do to those named in the writing.

This form of magic was directed at both nations and individuals who posed a threat to the Egyptian kingdom. Egypt's neighbor Libya is mentioned infrequently in the texts. However, there were apparently more powerful enemies in Sudan. Eight Egyptian individuals, who were likely part of a plot against the pharaoh (called a harem conspiracy), were also cursed in these texts.

The greatest threat, according to these texts, seemed to come from the area of Palestine and Syria. Over 60 towns or regions in this area were singled out for cursing. The list of place names includes well\-known towns such as:

* Byblos
* Ashkelon
* Tyre
* Jerusalem
* Beth\-shan

This list of places provides an important source for studying the historical geography of ancient Palestine.


