# Aquifer Open Bible Dictionary

**Tyndale Open Bible Dictionary: Aquifer Edition**

This work is an adaptation of *Tyndale Open Bible Dictionary* © 2023 Tyndale House Publishers, licensed under the CC BY\-SA 4\.0 license. The adaptation, *Aquifer Open Bible Dictionary*, was created by BiblioNexus and is also licensed under CC BY\-SA 4\.0\.

This resource has been adapted into multiple languages, including English, Tok Pisin, Arabic (عربي), French (Français), Hindi (हिंदी), Indonesian (Bahasa Indonesia), Portuguese (Português), Russian (Русский), Spanish (Español), Swahili (Kiswahili), and Simplified Chinese (简体中文).



--------------------------------

## Fiery Serpent (id: 5256)

FIERY SERPENT
=============

The fiery serpent was a bronze snake figure that Moses made to heal the Israelites. When the people of Israel complained against God and Moses during their journey through the wilderness, God sent poisonous snakes as punishment. Many of the Israelites died from the snake bites ([Numbers 21:4–9](https://ref.ly/Num21:4-Num21:9)). 

The people admitted their sin and asked Moses to pray for them. God told Moses to make a fiery (bronze) snake and put it on a pole. Anyone who was bitten could look at the bronze snake and be healed.

to this story when explaining his coming death. He said that just as Moses lifted up the snake in the wilderness, he would be lifted up (on the cross), and everyone who believes in him would have eternal life ([John 3:14–15](https://ref.ly/John3:14-John3:15)). The apostle Paul also used this story as a warning to Christians not to test God as the Israelites did ([1 Corinthians 10:9](https://ref.ly/1Cor10:9)).

*See also* Bronze Serpent, Bronze Snake.

* **Associated Passages:** 1CO 10:9; NUM 21:4–NUM 21:9; JHN 3:14–JHN 3:15
* **Associated Articles:** Bronze Snake, Bronze Serpent (ID: `4344@TyndaleBibleDictionary`)

