# Aquifer Open Bible Dictionary

**Tyndale Open Bible Dictionary: Aquifer Edition**

This work is an adaptation of *Tyndale Open Bible Dictionary* © 2023 Tyndale House Publishers, licensed under the CC BY\-SA 4\.0 license. The adaptation, *Aquifer Open Bible Dictionary*, was created by BiblioNexus and is also licensed under CC BY\-SA 4\.0\.

This resource has been adapted into multiple languages, including English, Tok Pisin, Arabic (عربي), French (Français), Hindi (हिंदी), Indonesian (Bahasa Indonesia), Portuguese (Português), Russian (Русский), Spanish (Español), Swahili (Kiswahili), and Simplified Chinese (简体中文).



--------------------------------

## Forum of Appius (id: 3679)

FORUM OF APPIUS
===============

The marketplace in [Acts 28:15\.](https://ref.ly/Acts28:15) This was the place where Christians met the apostle Paul when he came to appear before Caesar. It was apparently named for Appius Claudius. He was the builder of the Appian Way. The Appian Way was a major highway from southeast Italy running northwest to Rome. 

Around the forum was a region of swamp and marsh. It was notorious in the ancient world for bad water, mosquitoes, expensive taverns for travelers, nighttime noisy traffic of cargoes, and passengers on mule\-drawn barges along a canal cut through the area. The Appian Way passes through the Appius Forum about 64 kilometers (40 miles) south of Rome.

*See also* Appian Way; Forum.

* **Associated Passages:** ACT 28:15
* **Associated Articles:** Appian Way (ID: `3678@TyndaleBibleDictionary`); Forum (ID: `5299@TyndaleBibleDictionary`)

