# Aquifer Open Bible Dictionary

**Tyndale Open Bible Dictionary: Aquifer Edition**

This work is an adaptation of *Tyndale Open Bible Dictionary* © 2023 Tyndale House Publishers, licensed under the CC BY\-SA 4\.0 license. The adaptation, *Aquifer Open Bible Dictionary*, was created by BiblioNexus and is also licensed under CC BY\-SA 4\.0\.

This resource has been adapted into multiple languages, including English, Tok Pisin, Arabic (عربي), French (Français), Hindi (हिंदी), Indonesian (Bahasa Indonesia), Portuguese (Português), Russian (Русский), Spanish (Español), Swahili (Kiswahili), and Simplified Chinese (简体中文).



--------------------------------

## Gabriel (id: 5333)

GABRIEL
=======

One of the two angels mentioned by name in the Bible (the other is Michael). Gabriel appeared in He appeared to a man named Daniel to explain the meaning of a special vision Daniel had received. Gabriel also told Daniel what would happen on Judgment Day (the time when God will judge all people) and gave Daniel wisdom and understanding ([Daniel 8:16](https://ref.ly/Dan8:16); [9:21–22](https://ref.ly/Dan9:21-Dan9:22)). 

In the New Testament, Gabriel appeared to a priest named Zechariah. This happened while Zechariah was serving in the temple. He announced the birth of Zechariah's son, John the Baptist ([Luke 1:11–20](https://ref.ly/Luke1:11-Luke1:20)). Six months later, Gabriel appeared to Mary. He announced she would be the mother of Jesus, who was the Messiah (God's chosen one) that people had been waiting for ([Luke 1:26–33](https://ref.ly/Luke1:26-Luke1:33)). 

Many people call Gabriel an archangel (a chief or leading angel), but the Bible itself never uses this title for him.

Jewish religious texts that are not part of the Bible also tell us about Gabriel. In the books of Enoch, he is described as one of the four chief angels, along with Michael, Raphael, and Uriel (1 Enoch 40:3, 6\). He is one of the holy angels (1 Enoch 20:7\) who looks down from heaven and is a main mediator (1 Enoch 9:1; 40:6; 2 Enoch 21:3\). He is to destroy the wicked (1 Enoch 9:9–10\) and cast them into the furnace (54:6\) and is set over all powers (40:9\). Michael sits at God’s right hand. Gabriel sits on the left (2 Enoch 24:1\). Michael, as the guardian angel of Israel (compare [Daniel 12:1](https://ref.ly/Dan12:1)) and a high priest of heaven, is more concerned with affairs in heaven. But, Gabriel is God's messenger. He goes from heaven to execute God's will on earth.

*See also* Angel.

* **Associated Passages:** DAN 8:16; DAN 12:1; DAN 9:21–DAN 9:22; LUK 1:11–LUK 1:20; LUK 1:26–LUK 1:33
* **Associated Articles:** Angel (ID: `3611@TyndaleBibleDictionary`)

