# Aquifer Open Bible Dictionary

**Tyndale Open Bible Dictionary: Aquifer Edition**

This work is an adaptation of *Tyndale Open Bible Dictionary* © 2023 Tyndale House Publishers, licensed under the CC BY\-SA 4\.0 license. The adaptation, *Aquifer Open Bible Dictionary*, was created by BiblioNexus and is also licensed under CC BY\-SA 4\.0\.

This resource has been adapted into multiple languages, including English, Tok Pisin, Arabic (عربي), French (Français), Hindi (हिंदी), Indonesian (Bahasa Indonesia), Portuguese (Português), Russian (Русский), Spanish (Español), Swahili (Kiswahili), and Simplified Chinese (简体中文).



--------------------------------

## Galbanum (id: 5351)

GALBANUM
========

Galbanum is a sticky, aromatic resin that comes from a tall plant in the *Apiaceae* family, which also includes carrots and parsley. It was one of the ingredients in the special incense used in the tabernacle ([Exodus 30:34](https://ref.ly/Exod30:34)). 

The galbanum plant (*Ferula galbaniflua* or *Ferula gummosa*) grows naturally in regions such as Syria and Persia. It has small, greenish\-white flowers and fruit that grow in clusters at the top of its stem. Its leaves are divided into many small parts, resembling those of parsley or carrot plants.

To collect galbanum, people cut the plant’s stem near the ground. This releases a milky liquid. This liquid hardens into a waxy, brownish resin. Today, galbanum is sometimes used in making varnish and perfumes.

[Sirach 24:15](https://ref.ly/Sir24:15) describes galbanum as having a pleasing aroma. By itself, galbanum has a strong, pungent smell when burned. But it was evidently mixed with other substances to make a pleasant\-smelling ointment.

* **Associated Passages:** EXO 30:34; SIR 24:15
* **Associated Articles:** Plants (ID: `7761@Unknown`)

