# Aquifer Open Bible Dictionary

**Tyndale Open Bible Dictionary: Aquifer Edition**

This work is an adaptation of *Tyndale Open Bible Dictionary* © 2023 Tyndale House Publishers, licensed under the CC BY\-SA 4\.0 license. The adaptation, *Aquifer Open Bible Dictionary*, was created by BiblioNexus and is also licensed under CC BY\-SA 4\.0\.

This resource has been adapted into multiple languages, including English, Tok Pisin, Arabic (عربي), French (Français), Hindi (हिंदी), Indonesian (Bahasa Indonesia), Portuguese (Português), Russian (Русский), Spanish (Español), Swahili (Kiswahili), and Simplified Chinese (简体中文).



--------------------------------

## Freedmen (id: 5305)

FREEDMEN
========

The freedmen were members of a Jewish synagogue in Jerusalem ([Acts 6:9](https://ref.ly/Acts6:9)). who had been captured and taken to Rome by the general Pompey, who lived from 106–48 BC. These Jews were later released from slavery.

Pompey found that the Jews followed their religious and national customs so strictly that they were not useful as slaves. This is why they were freed.

Not all the freedmen returned to Jerusalem. Some stayed in Rome. The Roman writer Pliny described the freedman as a “mean commoner.” 

The name "freedmen" (or "Freed Slaves" in the New Living Translation) comes from a Latin word for a person who was released from slavery, or the son of someone who was once a slave.

*See* Libertines.

* **Associated Passages:** ACT 6:9
* **Associated Articles:** Libertines (ID: `6736@TyndaleBibleDictionary`)

