# Aquifer Open Bible Dictionary

**Tyndale Open Bible Dictionary: Aquifer Edition**

This work is an adaptation of *Tyndale Open Bible Dictionary* © 2023 Tyndale House Publishers, licensed under the CC BY\-SA 4\.0 license. The adaptation, *Aquifer Open Bible Dictionary*, was created by BiblioNexus and is also licensed under CC BY\-SA 4\.0\.

This resource has been adapted into multiple languages, including English, Tok Pisin, Arabic (عربي), French (Français), Hindi (हिंदी), Indonesian (Bahasa Indonesia), Portuguese (Português), Russian (Русский), Spanish (Español), Swahili (Kiswahili), and Simplified Chinese (简体中文).



--------------------------------

## Fox (id: 5303)

FOX
===

A small, wild, meat\-eating, doglike mammal, several species of which existed in Palestine in the biblical period. 

Types of Foxes
--------------

The red fox of the holy land (*Vulpes palaetinae*) looks like the North American fox but is smaller than a wolf. This nighttime creature hunts by itself. It has a long, bushy tail, about half its body length. It eats a wide range of foods, including:

* Fruits
* Plants
* Mice
* Beetles
* Birds

However, it does not eat dead animals. Grapes are its favorite food, but its burrowing can damage vineyards ([Song of Solomon 2:15](https://ref.ly/Song2:15)). The fox is intelligent and known for its cunning ([Luke 13:32](https://ref.ly/Luke13:32)). It has considerable endurance and can run at speeds up to 48 kilometers (30 miles) per hour. The Jews rebuilding Jerusalem's wall were insulted that a fox jumping on it would knock it down ([Nehemiah 4:3](https://ref.ly/Neh4:3)).

The Egyptian fox *(Vulpes niloticus)* is found in the central and southern parts of the holy land. It is somewhat smaller than the common red fox. Its back is rust\-colored and its belly light. The Syrian fox *(Vulpes flavescens)* that lives in the northern part of the holy land is shiny gold in color.

Some Old Testament references such as [Psalm 63:10](https://ref.ly/Ps63:10) and [Lamentations 5:18](https://ref.ly/Lam5:18) are translated as “fox” in the King James Version but probably refer to jackals. Jackals, not foxes, hunt in packs and tend to act as scavengers. See Jackals.

* **Associated Articles:** Animals (ID: `3614@Unknown`); Jackal (ID: `6160@TyndaleBibleDictionary`)

