# Aquifer Open Bible Dictionary

**Tyndale Open Bible Dictionary: Aquifer Edition**

This work is an adaptation of *Tyndale Open Bible Dictionary* © 2023 Tyndale House Publishers, licensed under the CC BY\-SA 4\.0 license. The adaptation, *Aquifer Open Bible Dictionary*, was created by BiblioNexus and is also licensed under CC BY\-SA 4\.0\.

This resource has been adapted into multiple languages, including English, Tok Pisin, Arabic (عربي), French (Français), Hindi (हिंदी), Indonesian (Bahasa Indonesia), Portuguese (Português), Russian (Русский), Spanish (Español), Swahili (Kiswahili), and Simplified Chinese (简体中文).



--------------------------------

## Gallio (id: 5357)

GALLIO
======

Gallio was a Roman official in the first century AD. He was born in Cordoba, Spain, in 3 BC. His birth name was Marcus Annaeus Novatus. He died in AD 65\. Gallio was the son of Marcus Annaeus Seneca and the older brother of the philosopher Seneca.

Gallio moved to Rome during the reign of the emperor Tiberius. Later, a famous public speaker named Lucius Junius Gallio adopted him. After that, Novatus took the name Gallio. Lucius Junius Gallio was a wealthy man. He trained Gallio for work in government and public service.

Gallio served as the Roman proconsul (governor) of Achaia between AD 51 and 53\.

During the apostle Paul’s first visit to Corinth, some Jews brought a complaint against Paul. They told Gallio that Paul was teaching people to worship God in a way that was against the law ([Acts 18:12–17](https://ref.ly/Acts18:12-Acts18:17)). Gallio quickly rejected their complaint. He said the matter was about Jewish law, not Roman law. Gallio refused to judge a religious dispute. This response was typical of Roman governors. They often avoided getting involved in arguments about religion.

Gallio had to leave Achaia because he became sick. He later returned to Rome and served as *consul suffectus* (a temporary consul) under the emperor Nero. At some point, Gallio was connected to a plot against Nero. At first, Nero pardoned him. But later, Gallio was forced to take his own life.

* **Associated Passages:** ACT 18:12–ACT 18:17

