# Aquifer Open Bible Dictionary

**Tyndale Open Bible Dictionary: Aquifer Edition**

This work is an adaptation of *Tyndale Open Bible Dictionary* © 2023 Tyndale House Publishers, licensed under the CC BY\-SA 4\.0 license. The adaptation, *Aquifer Open Bible Dictionary*, was created by BiblioNexus and is also licensed under CC BY\-SA 4\.0\.

This resource has been adapted into multiple languages, including English, Tok Pisin, Arabic (عربي), French (Français), Hindi (हिंदी), Indonesian (Bahasa Indonesia), Portuguese (Português), Russian (Русский), Spanish (Español), Swahili (Kiswahili), and Simplified Chinese (简体中文).



--------------------------------

## Gentiles, Court of the (id: 5419)

COURT OF THE GENTILES
=====================

The Court of the Gentiles was the largest outer area of King Herod's temple in Jerusalem. This courtyard was rectangular but not even on all sides, being wider at its northern end than its southern end. Both Jewish people and non\-Jewish people (gentiles) could enter this area.

In this courtyard, merchants sold animals for temple sacrifices, and money changers helped visitors exchange their coins. There was a dividing wall with signs that warned gentiles not to enter the temple's inner areas. This is where Jesus drove out the merchants and money changers who were misusing the temple ([Matthew 21:12–13](https://ref.ly/Matt21:12-Matt21:13); [Mark 11:15–18](https://ref.ly/Mark11:15-Mark11:18); [John 2:14–16](https://ref.ly/John2:14-John2:16)).

*See also* Temple.

* **Associated Passages:** MAT 21:12–MAT 21:13; MRK 11:15–MRK 11:18; JHN 2:14–JHN 2:16
* **Associated Articles:** Temple (ID: `8782@TyndaleBibleDictionary`)

