# Aquifer Open Bible Dictionary

**Tyndale Open Bible Dictionary: Aquifer Edition**

This work is an adaptation of *Tyndale Open Bible Dictionary* © 2023 Tyndale House Publishers, licensed under the CC BY\-SA 4\.0 license. The adaptation, *Aquifer Open Bible Dictionary*, was created by BiblioNexus and is also licensed under CC BY\-SA 4\.0\.

This resource has been adapted into multiple languages, including English, Tok Pisin, Arabic (عربي), French (Français), Hindi (हिंदी), Indonesian (Bahasa Indonesia), Portuguese (Português), Russian (Русский), Spanish (Español), Swahili (Kiswahili), and Simplified Chinese (简体中文).



--------------------------------

## Gangrene (id: 5364)

GANGRENE
========

Gangrene is when tissue dies due to loss of the vital blood supply to that part of the body. It often happens to the farthest tip of an extremity such as fingertips or toes. The body part will turn black and surgeons will amputate the dead part. They do this so that tissue damage does not extend to more of the limb or harm the life of the person.

The term “gangrene” occurs only once in Scripture ([2 Timothy 2:17](https://ref.ly/2Tim2:17)). Paul warns Timothy not to allow talk that dishonors God. When people dishonor God in the way they talk, it will encourage more people to dishonor God in the way they act. Paul compares this to the way gangrene tends to spread to surrounding tissues of the body.

The disease in the feet of King Asa ([2 Chronicles 16:12](https://ref.ly/2Chr16:12)) was not named, but it could have been gangrene. One could compare the leprosy of Miriam the sister of Moses to gangrene. Scripture compares her condition to the deteriorating flesh of a stillborn baby ([Numbers 12:12](https://ref.ly/Num12:12)).

*See also* Medicine and Medical Practice.

* **Associated Passages:** NUM 12:12; 2CH 16:12; 2TI 2:17
* **Associated Articles:** Medicine and Medical Practice (ID: `7011@TyndaleBibleDictionary`)

