# Aquifer Open Bible Dictionary

**Tyndale Open Bible Dictionary: Aquifer Edition**

This work is an adaptation of *Tyndale Open Bible Dictionary* © 2023 Tyndale House Publishers, licensed under the CC BY\-SA 4\.0 license. The adaptation, *Aquifer Open Bible Dictionary*, was created by BiblioNexus and is also licensed under CC BY\-SA 4\.0\.

This resource has been adapted into multiple languages, including English, Tok Pisin, Arabic (عربي), French (Français), Hindi (हिंदी), Indonesian (Bahasa Indonesia), Portuguese (Português), Russian (Русский), Spanish (Español), Swahili (Kiswahili), and Simplified Chinese (简体中文).



--------------------------------

## Gecko (id: 5394)

GECKO
=====

A gecko is a small lizard that belongs to the scientific family *Gekkonidae*.

In Jewish food law, the gecko was considered ceremonially unclean. The region of Palestine and Israel has seven different types of gecko species, such as *Hemidactylus turcicus* and *Ptyodactylus hasselquistii*. All of these gecko species eat insects. Geckos make a sound that resembles mourning by quickly vibrating their tongues. According to legends, people believed geckos could cause leprosy (a skin disease) by crawling on someone.

Geckos are also called wall lizards. This name comes from their ability to walk on ceilings using suction discs on their toes. However, they often fall into people's homes. Since they were considered ceremonially unclean, their presence was very troublesome for Jewish families ([Leviticus 11:31–38](https://ref.ly/Lev11:31-Lev11:38)).

In [Leviticus 11:30](https://ref.ly/Lev11:30), the translators of the King James Version incorrectly identified the gecko as a ferret.

*See also* Lizard.

* **Associated Passages:** LEV 11:30
* **Associated Articles:** Animals (ID: `3614@Unknown`); Lizard (ID: `6763@TyndaleBibleDictionary`)

