# Aquifer Open Bible Dictionary

**Tyndale Open Bible Dictionary: Aquifer Edition**

This work is an adaptation of *Tyndale Open Bible Dictionary* © 2023 Tyndale House Publishers, licensed under the CC BY\-SA 4\.0 license. The adaptation, *Aquifer Open Bible Dictionary*, was created by BiblioNexus and is also licensed under CC BY\-SA 4\.0\.

This resource has been adapted into multiple languages, including English, Tok Pisin, Arabic (عربي), French (Français), Hindi (हिंदी), Indonesian (Bahasa Indonesia), Portuguese (Português), Russian (Русский), Spanish (Español), Swahili (Kiswahili), and Simplified Chinese (简体中文).



--------------------------------

## Gog (id: 5501)

GOG
===

1\. Reubenite, Shemaiah’s son ([1 Chr 5:4](https://ref.ly/1Chr5:4)).

2\. Individual described as the prince of Meshech who ruled over the land of Magog ([Ez 38:2–21](https://ref.ly/Ezek38:2-Ezek38:21); [39:1–16](https://ref.ly/Ezek39:1-Ezek39:16)). Magog was evidently a territory located far from Palestine whose inhabitants would attack Jerusalem in a final attempt to overthrow God’s people. The Lord, through Ezekiel, promised Gog a catastrophic defeat.

Attempts to identify Gog with some historical ruler have not been convincing. Gyges of Lydia, who drove out Cimmerian invaders, has been suggested, but equally probable are Gaga, mentioned in the Amarna tablets, and Gagi, king of the city\-state of Sabi. Some have maintained a mythological interpretation, in which Gog is a symbol of evil actively opposing good. Certainly Gog—connected in Scripture with godless nations such as Gomer, Put, Persia, Sheba, and Tarshish—is depicted as leading an alliance of world powers in opposition to God. Gog also appears in Revelation ([20:7–9](https://ref.ly/Rev20:7-Rev20:9)), where Satan mobilizes Gog and Magog (i.e., the nations of the world) against God’s saints in a final battle. A literal view contemplates an attack on Jerusalem by hostile forces (cf. [Zec 14](https://ref.ly/Zech14:1-Zech14:21)), while a symbolic interpretation envisions a climactic conflict between good and evil.

* **Associated Passages:** 1CH 5:4; EZK 38:2–EZK 38:21; EZK 39:1–EZK 39:16; REV 20:7–REV 20:9; ZEC 14:1–ZEC 14:21

