# Aquifer Open Bible Dictionary

**Tyndale Open Bible Dictionary: Aquifer Edition**

This work is an adaptation of *Tyndale Open Bible Dictionary* © 2023 Tyndale House Publishers, licensed under the CC BY\-SA 4\.0 license. The adaptation, *Aquifer Open Bible Dictionary*, was created by BiblioNexus and is also licensed under CC BY\-SA 4\.0\.

This resource has been adapted into multiple languages, including English, Tok Pisin, Arabic (عربي), French (Français), Hindi (हिंदी), Indonesian (Bahasa Indonesia), Portuguese (Português), Russian (Русский), Spanish (Español), Swahili (Kiswahili), and Simplified Chinese (简体中文).



--------------------------------

## Hadad-Rimmon (id: 5568)

HADAD\-RIMMON
=============

Combination of two storm deities, Hadad (mentioned in the Ugaritic texts) and Rimmon (Babylonian storm god). Hadad\-rimmon was formerly thought to be a place. The Ras Shamra material equated Hadad with the vegetation god Baal, who was worshiped in an effort to ensure agricultural productivity. Canaanite fertility rituals included periodic mourning for the deceased Baal by the goddess Anat, his consort. It is to that rite that [Zechariah 12:11](https://ref.ly/Zech12:11) alludes. The messianic reference in the previous verse likens the grief in Jerusalem to the lamentation for Hadad\-rimmon at the rites near Megiddo.

*See also* Canaanite Deities and Religion.

* **Associated Passages:** ZEC 12:11
* **Associated Articles:** Canaanite Deities and Religion (ID: `4405@TyndaleBibleDictionary`)

