# Aquifer Open Bible Dictionary

**Tyndale Open Bible Dictionary: Aquifer Edition**

This work is an adaptation of *Tyndale Open Bible Dictionary* © 2023 Tyndale House Publishers, licensed under the CC BY\-SA 4\.0 license. The adaptation, *Aquifer Open Bible Dictionary*, was created by BiblioNexus and is also licensed under CC BY\-SA 4\.0\.

This resource has been adapted into multiple languages, including English, Tok Pisin, Arabic (عربي), French (Français), Hindi (हिंदी), Indonesian (Bahasa Indonesia), Portuguese (Português), Russian (Русский), Spanish (Español), Swahili (Kiswahili), and Simplified Chinese (简体中文).



--------------------------------

## Habakkuk (Person) (id: 5558)

HABAKKUK (Person)
=================

Author of the eighth book of the Minor Prophets. The meaning of Habakkuk’s name is uncertain. It was probably derived from a Hebrew word meaning “to embrace.”

Nothing is known about Habakkuk apart from what can be inferred from his book. Several legends purporting to give accounts of his life are generally regarded as untrustworthy. The apocryphal book Bel and the Dragon describes a miraculous transporting of Habakkuk to Daniel while Daniel was in the den of lions. A Jewish legend makes Habakkuk the son of the Shunammite woman mentioned in [2 Kings 4:8–37](https://ref.ly/2Kgs4:8-2Kgs4:37). That legend apparently is based on the tradition that she would “embrace” a son. Chronological difficulties make both accounts unlikely.

Habakkuk lived in the period during the rise of the Chaldeans ([Hb 1:6](https://ref.ly/Hab1:6)), that is, during the reigns of the Judean kings Josiah and Jehoiakim. The dates 612–589 BC delineate the probable period of his prophetic activity.

The book of Habakkuk reveals a man of great sensitivity. His deep concern about injustice and his prayer ([Hb 3](https://ref.ly/Hab3:1-Hab3:19)) show that Habakkuk was characterized by profound religious conviction and social awareness.

*See also* Habakkuk, Book of; Prophet, Prophetess.

* **Associated Passages:** HAB 1:6; HAB 3:1–HAB 3:19; 2KI 4:8–2KI 4:37
* **Associated Articles:** Book of Habakkuk (ID: `5557@TyndaleBibleDictionary`); Prophet, Prophetess (ID: `7831@TyndaleBibleDictionary`)

