# Aquifer Open Bible Dictionary

**Tyndale Open Bible Dictionary: Aquifer Edition**

This work is an adaptation of *Tyndale Open Bible Dictionary* © 2023 Tyndale House Publishers, licensed under the CC BY\-SA 4\.0 license. The adaptation, *Aquifer Open Bible Dictionary*, was created by BiblioNexus and is also licensed under CC BY\-SA 4\.0\.

This resource has been adapted into multiple languages, including English, Tok Pisin, Arabic (عربي), French (Français), Hindi (हिंदी), Indonesian (Bahasa Indonesia), Portuguese (Português), Russian (Русский), Spanish (Español), Swahili (Kiswahili), and Simplified Chinese (简体中文).



--------------------------------

## Halicarnassus (id: 5608)

HALICARNASSUS
=============

An important commercial city of Caria in Asia Minor, beautifully situated on a bay about 15 miles (24 kilometers) from the island of Cos. Its excellent natural harbor and the fertile soil in the surrounding area, which produced abundant crops of fruits and nuts, made it a prominent trading center. The tomb of one of the most famous kings of Caria (Mausolus, 377–353 BC) at Halicarnassus was considered one of the wonders of the ancient world. It was also the birthplace of Herodotus and Dionysius. The city was burned by Alexander the Great when he was not able to take the acropolis. From [1 Maccabees 15:23](https://ref.ly/1Macc15:23) it appears that it had a substantial Jewish population because a letter written by the Roman Senate asked that no harm should be done to them ([1 Macc 15:19](https://ref.ly/1Macc15:19)). Josephus notes that the city granted the Jews the right to “celebrate their Sabbaths, and perform their holy offices, according to the Jewish laws; and may make their proseuchae (places of prayer) at the sea\-side, according to the customs of their forefathers” (*Antiquities* 14\.10\.23\). The modern town of Bodrum covers a part of the site of the ancient city.

* **Associated Passages:** 1MA 15:19; 1MA 15:23

