# Aquifer Open Bible Dictionary

**Tyndale Open Bible Dictionary: Aquifer Edition**

This work is an adaptation of *Tyndale Open Bible Dictionary* © 2023 Tyndale House Publishers, licensed under the CC BY\-SA 4\.0 license. The adaptation, *Aquifer Open Bible Dictionary*, was created by BiblioNexus and is also licensed under CC BY\-SA 4\.0\.

This resource has been adapted into multiple languages, including English, Tok Pisin, Arabic (عربي), French (Français), Hindi (हिंदी), Indonesian (Bahasa Indonesia), Portuguese (Português), Russian (Русский), Spanish (Español), Swahili (Kiswahili), and Simplified Chinese (简体中文).



--------------------------------

## Hierapolis (id: 5843)

HIERAPOLIS
==========

City of southwest Phrygia, strategically located between Colosse to the east and Laodicea to the south. The founding of the city is credited to Eumenes II of Pergamum (197–160 BC). Hierapolis, because of its mineral springs and deep cave known as the Plutonium, came to be a cultic center for the worship of Phrygian gods. Lethal vapors issued from the cave, which was thought to be an entrance to the underworld. Residents believed that a priest was seated deep inside the cave and that on certain occasions prophecies would be uttered for those seeking them. The mineral baths attracted visitors, and gradually the city developed into a leading commercial center. As Roman rule enveloped the city, Hierapolis became part of the province of Asia.

Under Paul’s influence, Christianity took hold there during his stay in Ephesus. Paul mentions Hierapolis in connection with the believer Epaphras, who worked diligently for the inhabitants as well as those in Laodicea and Colosse ([Col 4:13](https://ref.ly/Col4:13)). Even though several early Christians were martyred there, the church continued to grow. In the fourth century, Christians closed off the Plutonium with stones.

* **Associated Passages:** COL 4:13

