# Aquifer Open Bible Dictionary

**Tyndale Open Bible Dictionary: Aquifer Edition**

This work is an adaptation of *Tyndale Open Bible Dictionary* © 2023 Tyndale House Publishers, licensed under the CC BY\-SA 4\.0 license. The adaptation, *Aquifer Open Bible Dictionary*, was created by BiblioNexus and is also licensed under CC BY\-SA 4\.0\.

This resource has been adapted into multiple languages, including English, Tok Pisin, Arabic (عربي), French (Français), Hindi (हिंदी), Indonesian (Bahasa Indonesia), Portuguese (Português), Russian (Русский), Spanish (Español), Swahili (Kiswahili), and Simplified Chinese (简体中文).



--------------------------------

## Hermes (id: 5817)

HERMES
======

1. A Greek god who was the son of Zeus and Maia. The Romans called him Mercury. In Greek mythology, Hermes was the messenger of the gods. He guided the souls of dead people to Hades (the place of the dead). He was the god of fertility, the patron of music, the guardian of travelers, and the god of expressive speech.

    When Paul was ministering in Lystra, the local people thought the apostle Paul was Hermes. This was because Paul performed a miracle and was the main speaker. The people of Lystra believed Paul was a god who had come to visit them in human form ([Acts 14:11–12](https://ref.ly/Acts14:11-Acts14:12), Mercurius in the King James Version.

2. A Christian to whom Paul sent greetings in his letter to Rome ([Romans 16:14](https://ref.ly/Rom16:14)).

* **Associated Passages:** ROM 16:14; ACT 14:11–ACT 14:12

