# Aquifer Open Bible Dictionary

**Tyndale Open Bible Dictionary: Aquifer Edition**

This work is an adaptation of *Tyndale Open Bible Dictionary* © 2023 Tyndale House Publishers, licensed under the CC BY\-SA 4\.0 license. The adaptation, *Aquifer Open Bible Dictionary*, was created by BiblioNexus and is also licensed under CC BY\-SA 4\.0\.

This resource has been adapted into multiple languages, including English, Tok Pisin, Arabic (عربي), French (Français), Hindi (हिंदी), Indonesian (Bahasa Indonesia), Portuguese (Português), Russian (Русский), Spanish (Español), Swahili (Kiswahili), and Simplified Chinese (简体中文).



--------------------------------

## Hoshea (id: 5921)

HOSHEA
======

1. The original name of Joshua, the son of Nun. Joshua later became Moses's successor as leader of the Israelites. Moses changed Joshua's name from Hoshea to Joshua ([Numbers 13:8, 16](https://ref.ly/Num13:8,Num13:16)).

    *See* Joshua (Person) \#1.

2. The son of Elah and the last of the 20 kings of the northern kingdom of Israel ([2 Kings 17:1–6](https://ref.ly/2Kgs17:1-2Kgs17:6)). King Hoshea ruled for nine years, from 732 to 723 BC, Then the Assyrians took him captive. In the later years of the northern kingdom. Assyria had gained control of most of the Middle East. This happened under the rule of Tiglath\-pileser III. Assyria had reduced the the northern kingdom to just three tribal areas. All that remained was Ephraim, Issachar, and the half of Manasseh west of the Jordan River.

    Earlier, the northern kingdom had formed an alliance with Rezin of Damascus (Syria). This happened under the rule of Pekah, who ruled from 740 to 732 BC. Ahaz was king of Judah during this time. Ahaz ruled from 735 to 715 Bc. King Pekah of Israel attempted to coerce King Ahaz of Judah to join them against Tiglath\-pileser ([2 Kings 16:5](https://ref.ly/2Kgs16:5); [Isaiah 7:1–6](https://ref.ly/Isa7:1-Isa7:6)). Assyria came to the aid of Judah. During this time, Hoshea was part of a group who killed Pekah ([2 Kings 15:30](https://ref.ly/2Kgs15:30)). Tiglath\-pileser rewarded Hoshea by making him king over what remained of the northern kingdom.

    Hoshea ruled only as a servant king under Assyria and paid large tribute taxes. He remained loyal to Assyria until the death of Tiglath\-pileser in 727 BC. When Shalmaneser V became the new king of Assyria, he did not trust Hoshea. Shalmaneser marched against Hosea, continuing to demand yearly tribute ([2 Kings 17:3](https://ref.ly/2Kgs17:3)).

    Soon after, Hoshea attempted to assert independence. He stopped paying tribute taxes and entered into negotiations with King So of Egypt (verse [4](https://ref.ly/2Kgs17:4)). Egypt was willing to support Hoshea because they feared Assyria controlling Palestine. Egypt hoped that Samaria (Israel's capital) would remain a buffer zone between Egypt and Assyria.

    Shalmaneser then sent his army against Samaria in 724 BC. Hoshea discovered that his alliance with Egypt was of little value. The Assyrians captured Hoshea. They surrounded Samaria for three years. The city fell to the Assyrians in 722 BC. Sargon II, who had replaced Shalmaneser around 726 BC, moved many Israelites to various places in Assyria. This ended the northern kingdom.

3. The son of Azaziah. He was one of the officers of King David. He was in charge of the Ephraimites ([1 Chronicles 27:20](https://ref.ly/1Chr27:20)).
4. One who the people who put his seal on the covenant of Ezra ([Nehemiah 10:23](https://ref.ly/Neh10:23)).
5. An eighth\-century prophet of Israel. He is better known as Hosea.

    *See* Hosea (Person); Hosea, Book of.

* **Associated Passages:** NUM 13:8; NUM 13:16; 2KI 15:30; 2KI 16:5; 2KI 17:3; 2KI 17:4; 1CH 27:20; NEH 10:23; 2KI 17:1–2KI 17:6; ISA 7:1–ISA 7:6
* **Associated Articles:** Hosea, Book of (ID: `5917@TyndaleBibleDictionary`); Hosea (Person) (ID: `5918@TyndaleBibleDictionary`); Joshua (Person) (ID: `6459@TyndaleBibleDictionary`)

