# Aquifer Open Bible Dictionary

**Tyndale Open Bible Dictionary: Aquifer Edition**

This work is an adaptation of *Tyndale Open Bible Dictionary* © 2023 Tyndale House Publishers, licensed under the CC BY\-SA 4\.0 license. The adaptation, *Aquifer Open Bible Dictionary*, was created by BiblioNexus and is also licensed under CC BY\-SA 4\.0\.

This resource has been adapted into multiple languages, including English, Tok Pisin, Arabic (عربي), French (Français), Hindi (हिंदी), Indonesian (Bahasa Indonesia), Portuguese (Português), Russian (Русский), Spanish (Español), Swahili (Kiswahili), and Simplified Chinese (简体中文).



--------------------------------

## Homes and Dwellings (id: 5889)

HOMES AND DWELLINGS
===================

Preview

•Middle Bronze Age Houses

•Late Bronze Age Houses

•Israelite Houses of the Iron Age

•Houses in New Testament Times

Middle Bronze Age Houses (c. 1800–1500 BC)
------------------------------------------

Israel’s early ancestors lived mostly in tents or temporary dwellings, but the Canaanites of the middle Bronze Age (into whose land the Israelites came) lived in substantial houses of several rooms built around a courtyard.

The simplest form of this new type of house had a courtyard with a single room on one side, generally on the west of the courtyard, to avoid having the prevailing westerly winds blow smoke into the room. Silos for storing grain were normally in the room rather than in the courtyard. Good examples of such one\-roomed houses were found at Tell Nagila, northwest of Beersheba, dating to about 1700 BC. Three such houses had a room 10 by 7 feet (3 by 2\.1 meters) and a courtyard 10 by 16 feet (3 by 4\.9 meters). Partitions sometimes divided the room. The walls were made of rough stone and mud bricks covered by mud plaster and were hardly thick enough to carry a second story. Houses were set close together to take advantage of a common back wall with entrances to the court on roughly parallel streets. Each house contained a stone and clay bench along the walls.

Sometimes several rooms were built off one side of the courtyard. The grandest of these yet found comes from Tell Beit Mirsim, dating from about 1600 BC, probably the house of a local governor or patrician. There were no less than six rooms on the western side of the courtyard, which was some 35 by 19 feet (10\.7 by 5\.8 meters) in size. The roofed living space, including both the ground and second floors, was about 1,500 square feet (139 square meters); a second floor is assumed from the thickness of the walls all around. The ground floor may have been multifunctional with two stable rooms and two storage areas. Other less imposing variants of the courtyard house with rooms on one side only come from this same tell in Stratum E (c. 1700 BC).

The second type of house in the middle Bronze Age had a roofed hall with rooms on one or two sides. A good example of such a house with rooms on one side comes from Tell Beit Mirsim, dating from about 1800 BC. The large, roofed, rectangular hall contained three large, flat stones set along the long axis to serve as foundations for the wooden roof supports. Rafters of wood and a roof of reeds covered with mud were found in the debris. Each of the three rooms on the west was entered from the hall. The stone foundations and mud brick walls were substantial enough to support a second story that could be reached by an exterior wooden staircase or ladder. The floor of earth, ashes, and straw was carefully smoothed over.

A third type of house consisted of an open courtyard with rooms on two adjacent sides of the court. A good example comes from Tell Beit Mirsim, built on the ruins of the house with the roofed hall. The roofed hall became the court. A house at Tell Taanach from the middle Bronze IIB period (c. 1700 BC) was of very strong construction with walls over three feet (.9 meter) thick laid in mortar. The courtyard contained a cistern, and an oven was found in a room on the east side of the house. The ground floors were plastered and covered 2,300 square feet (214 square meters). An interior staircase led to a second story.

In some houses, rooms were placed at opposite sides of the courtyard. Good examples come from Beth Shemesh (Tell er\-Rumeilah) and Megiddo. At Beth Shemesh the city wall formed the south wall of the house, and rooms lay east and west of the courtyard. Entrance was from the street into one of the rooms. The other rooms were entered by crossing the courtyard. The outer walls were over three feet (91\.4 centimeters) thick and interior walls a foot and a half (45\.7 centimeters) thick. Mud and lime plaster coated the walls.

At Megiddo houses were built against the north city wall. In level XII (c. 1750–1700 BC) three well\-preserved houses of this kind have been found. The houses were separated by walls at right angles to the city wall. Entrance to each house was through one door on the street, through a room, and into a courtyard paved with small stones and pebbles. The courtyards housed the ovens, and one house had a cistern.

A fourth type of middle Bronze Age house had rooms on three sides of the courtyard. These rooms varied greatly in size and use. A good example dating to about 1600 BC comes from Megiddo, level IX. The house was 42 by 39 feet (12\.8 by 11\.9 meters) in size and contained nine rooms of varying sizes. The courtyard was plastered with lime and had a large oven in the center. A second oven was found in an eastern room. Each room had a door to the courtyard. This house, like others of the middle Bronze Age, had burials under the floors (cf. [1 Sm 25:1](https://ref.ly/1Sam25:1); [1 Kgs 2:34](https://ref.ly/1Kgs2:34) for biblical references in the Iron Age).

The wide variety of Palestinian houses during the middle Bronze Age points to a level of prosperity much higher than that of the early Bronze Age. Both houses and tombs yielded quantities of graceful and well\-made household utensils.

Late Bronze Age Houses (c. 1550–1200 BC)
----------------------------------------

Information is limited for this period, due partly to the accidents of excavation and partly to the severe destruction of many sites at the close of the age from the hands of Israelites, Sea Peoples, Egyptians, and others.

Israelite Houses of the Iron Age (c. 1200–600 BC)
-------------------------------------------------

Many examples of domestic buildings come from this period. The Israelite structures were at first rather crude, but the quality improved. Thus at Tell Qasil in the 12th century there were poor homes with a courtyard and single room on one side. At contemporary Beth\-shemesh one larger house had a foundation of large uncut stones, a courtyard some 34 by 20 feet (10\.4 by 6\.1 meters), and three rooms on one side 11 by 10½ feet (3\.4 by 3\.2 meters). There was rough stone paving in the court and in two of the rooms. At Hazor a house was discovered that had a courtyard and rooms on one side dating to about 900 BC. Half of the courtyard was covered, the roof being supported on stone pillars. These stone pillars are very characteristic of the Iron Age houses in Palestine and have been found in sites all over the country.

The most common type of house in the days of the kings of Judah and Israel was one in which rooms were built on three sides of a courtyard. This type of house has sometimes been called the “four\-room house.” A long room was built across the short axis of the courtyard, and two other rooms, one on each side of the court, were constructed on the long axis. The courtyard was divided into three by two rows of pillars that extended down the long axis of the court. These pillars supported the roof and gave support for walls, either half height or full height. Entrance to the house was from the street into the courtyard, where ovens and silos were normally placed, although this varied. Such a framework could be expanded by adding a row of rooms outside the existing rooms on the long axis of the court. There were many ways to divide long rooms into smaller ones. In some cases where the walls were strong enough, a second story was added. An excellent example of a four\-room house that was later enlarged was found at Shechem and dated to the period around 748–724 BC. The courtyard contained a storage bin, a large open hearth, a quern (hand mill), stone grinders, and the bases of pottery jars resting in stone pedestals. In the rooms that had been added there was a device for catching water from the roof and delivering it to an underground water system. A large silo in one room was connected to a kitchen.

There is evidence that larger Iron Age houses served as industrial or commercial buildings. Certain houses at Tell Beit Mirsim contained dye vats and loom weights. In other places the large number of querns suggests a wheat\-grinding industry. There is evidence also of wine vats, or potters’ equipment, and of shops. Some houses had rooms set apart for religious purposes and contained incense stands, figurines, small altars, and the like.

The excavations of Kathleen Kenyon at Jerusalem brought to light houses from the last days of Judah. They were rather small and irregularly planned but of the same general design as those in the hill country sites of Judah—a courtyard divided by a row of stone pillars that supported the roof.

The contrast between big houses and small houses in some towns probably indicates the social inequality referred to in the prophets. In the 10th and 9th centuries BC there was a fairly uniform picture of many small houses and a few large ones. By the 8th century BC, at a town like Tirzah, there were three or four large houses and a great many flimsy structures.

Houses in New Testament Times
-----------------------------

There are references in the NT to houses, roofs, doors, foundations, an upper room, and lamps. One of Jesus’ parables refers to good and bad foundations ([Mt 7:25](https://ref.ly/Matt7:25)). In one incident friends took a paralyzed man up to the roof, which they took apart to lower him into the room where Jesus was ([Mk 2:4](https://ref.ly/Mark2:4)). Jesus referred to proclamations made from the housetops ([Mt 10:27](https://ref.ly/Matt10:27); [Lk 12:3](https://ref.ly/Luke12:3)), and Peter went up on the roof to pray ([Acts 10:9](https://ref.ly/Acts10:9)). Houses were swept to find lost objects ([Lk 15:8](https://ref.ly/Luke15:8)) and illuminated by lamps ([Mt 5:15](https://ref.ly/Matt5:15)). There are several references to houses of specific individuals ([Mk 8:3](https://ref.ly/Mark8:3); [Lk 10:5](https://ref.ly/Luke10:5); [16:4](https://ref.ly/Luke16:4); [19:9](https://ref.ly/Luke19:9); [Jn 11:20](https://ref.ly/John11:20); [Acts 4:34](https://ref.ly/Acts4:34); [9:11](https://ref.ly/Acts9:11); [10:32](https://ref.ly/Acts10:32)). Some houses had upper rooms on the roof reached by an outside staircase. The Passover meal was prepared in such a large upstairs room ([Mk 14:12–15](https://ref.ly/Mark14:12-Mark14:15)). The disciples lodged in a similar room after the death and resurrection of Jesus ([Acts 1:13](https://ref.ly/Acts1:13)). In such houses there were sometimes servants ([10:7](https://ref.ly/Acts10:7)), and some had a guest room ([Mk 14:14](https://ref.ly/Mark14:14)). We conclude from the NT data that there was a variety in the size and elegance of the houses of Jesus’ day. A typical street in Judea or Galilee would have houses ranging from the small house (25 to 30 square feet or 2\.3 to 2\.8 square meters) to the mansion of the upper classes, which could be two or more stories high embellished by rows of pillars and architectural adornment.

For the precise character of these houses, we have to turn to archaeological and literary evidence. The writings of the rabbis and Josephus fill in many details. Excavation in sites of the early Roman (Herodian) period (37 BC–AD 70\) have provided more tangible evidence. A rich source of information is the excavation in the old Jewish quarter in Jerusalem. One large house of some 209 square yards in size had a central courtyard where three cooking ovens and a water cistern were found. Large niches set in some of the walls contained broken pottery and must have been cupboards. Traces of mosaic floors and plastered walls give an idea of the beauty of this house. There were several rooms off the courtyard, perhaps as many as ten. The remains of other fine houses of the late second temple period have been found further west, notably in the area of the Armenian cemetery on Mt Zion, in which beautiful frescoes were preserved exhibiting a unique representation of birds. Other houses have yielded mosaic pavements with purely geometric patterns, thus adhering to the injunction against depicting animal forms.

*See also* Architecture.

* **Associated Passages:** 1SA 25:1; 1KI 2:34; MAT 5:15; MAT 7:25; MAT 10:27; MRK 2:4; MRK 8:3; MRK 14:14; LUK 10:5; LUK 12:3; LUK 15:8; LUK 16:4; LUK 19:9; JHN 11:20; ACT 1:13; ACT 4:34; ACT 9:11; ACT 10:7; ACT 10:9; ACT 10:32; MRK 14:12–MRK 14:15
* **Associated Articles:** Architecture (ID: `3720@TyndaleBibleDictionary`)

