# Aquifer Open Bible Dictionary

**Tyndale Open Bible Dictionary: Aquifer Edition**

This work is an adaptation of *Tyndale Open Bible Dictionary* © 2023 Tyndale House Publishers, licensed under the CC BY\-SA 4\.0 license. The adaptation, *Aquifer Open Bible Dictionary*, was created by BiblioNexus and is also licensed under CC BY\-SA 4\.0\.

This resource has been adapted into multiple languages, including English, Tok Pisin, Arabic (عربي), French (Français), Hindi (हिंदी), Indonesian (Bahasa Indonesia), Portuguese (Português), Russian (Русский), Spanish (Español), Swahili (Kiswahili), and Simplified Chinese (简体中文).



--------------------------------

## Ibis (id: 5974)

IBIS
====

The ibis (*Threskiornis aethiopica*) is a wading bird with a long, curved bill. This water bird is rare in the Holy Land today, but it might have lived there during Bible times. The ancient Egyptians considered the ibis sacred to their god Thoth (a god of wisdom and writing). The ibis has almost disappeared from Egypt now because the swamps along the Nile River have dried up.

Some Bible translations have identified the bird in [Leviticus 11:17](https://ref.ly/Lev11:17) as the ibis, which is classified as ceremonially unclean to eat. The same Hebrew word appears in [Deuteronomy 14:16](https://ref.ly/Deut14:16) and [Isaiah 34:11](https://ref.ly/Isa34:11), where most Bible translations use "great owl" instead of "ibis." Most Bible scholars today prefer the "great owl" translation.

*See also* Birds; Great Owl.

* **Associated Passages:** LEV 11:17
* **Associated Articles:** Birds (ID: `4250@TyndaleBibleDictionary`); Great Owl (ID: `5534@TyndaleBibleDictionary`)

