# Aquifer Open Bible Dictionary

**Tyndale Open Bible Dictionary: Aquifer Edition**

This work is an adaptation of *Tyndale Open Bible Dictionary* © 2023 Tyndale House Publishers, licensed under the CC BY\-SA 4\.0 license. The adaptation, *Aquifer Open Bible Dictionary*, was created by BiblioNexus and is also licensed under CC BY\-SA 4\.0\.

This resource has been adapted into multiple languages, including English, Tok Pisin, Arabic (عربي), French (Français), Hindi (हिंदी), Indonesian (Bahasa Indonesia), Portuguese (Português), Russian (Русский), Spanish (Español), Swahili (Kiswahili), and Simplified Chinese (简体中文).



--------------------------------

## India (id: 6019)

INDIA
=====

An eastern land of inconsistent geographical borders in Bible times. The Bible only mentions India in [Esther 1:1](https://ref.ly/Esth1:1) and [8:9\.](https://ref.ly/Esth8:9) Ahasuerus's empire stretched from Hoddu to Kush. The term "Hoddu" seems to come from an Old Persian word, Hindush. It was related to a Sanskrit word, Sindhu, meaning "stream," that is, the Indus River. Inscriptions from Persia show that India was a province of the Achaemenid Empire from 559 to 330 BC. This supports the biblical statements in Esther. Even the Greek historian Herodotus in the fifth century BC seems to have been poorly informed about India (*Persian Wars* 3\.94–106; 4\.40, 44\). Some Hebrew legends and traditions mention Jews in India in the days of King Solomon. Some interpreters have suggested that the Pishon river in the land of Havilah may refer to India ([Genesis 2:11](https://ref.ly/Gen2:11)). Some say that goods from Ophir, like sandalwood (“almug wood,” [1 Kings 10:11](https://ref.ly/1Kgs10:11); [2 Chronicles 2:8](https://ref.ly/2Chr2:8)), ivory, and apes, were Indian in origin. Also, some of the items carried by merchants to Tyre, such as ivory tusks and ebony ([Ezekiel 27:15](https://ref.ly/Ezek27:15)), may have come from India.

The New Testament does not reference India. However, Jewish writings from before and after the New Testament refer to the land. These include the Targums on Esther, the Midrashim, and the Talmud. It was only after Alexander the Great died in 323 BC that Palestine and Europe began to write about India. [1 Maccabees 6:37](https://ref.ly/1Macc6:37) says the Seleucid armies used war elephants (who were possibly from India), mounted by Indian drivers in the second century BC. [1 Maccabees 8:8](https://ref.ly/1Macc8:8) states that the Romans forced Antiochus III to surrender. 

India's value is unclear due to textual issues. Moreover, there's no proof that the Seleucid Empire extended to India. However, the Romans traded in India via Egypt and the Red Sea. This makes the lack of references in the New Testament strange. As the Christian centuries passed, references appeared in both Jewish and early Christian literature. It is certain that, early in the Christian era, there were settlements of Jews and monophysite Christians in India. Monophysitism is a belief that Jesus Christ had only one nature, which was divine, rather than both human and divine natures. According to legend, it was the apostle Thomas who took the gospel to India and founded the Mar Thoma Church.

* **Associated Passages:** GEN 2:11; 1KI 10:11; 2CH 2:8; EST 1:1; EST 8:9; EZK 27:15; 1MA 6:37; 1MA 8:8

