# Aquifer Open Bible Dictionary

**Tyndale Open Bible Dictionary: Aquifer Edition**

This work is an adaptation of *Tyndale Open Bible Dictionary* © 2023 Tyndale House Publishers, licensed under the CC BY\-SA 4\.0 license. The adaptation, *Aquifer Open Bible Dictionary*, was created by BiblioNexus and is also licensed under CC BY\-SA 4\.0\.

This resource has been adapted into multiple languages, including English, Tok Pisin, Arabic (عربي), French (Français), Hindi (हिंदी), Indonesian (Bahasa Indonesia), Portuguese (Português), Russian (Русский), Spanish (Español), Swahili (Kiswahili), and Simplified Chinese (简体中文).



--------------------------------

## Hushai (id: 5958)

HUSHAI
======

Hushai was a friend and adviser of King David. Hushai remained loyal to King David when Absalom, David's son, rebelled against him. Hushai's fellow adviser, Ahithophel, left David and joined Absalom's rebellion. 

Following David's instructions, Hushai pretended to be loyal to Absalom. This allowed him to secretly send information to David about Absalom's plans. Ahithophel urged Absalom to attack David before he could gather mother soldiers. BHowever, Absalom chose to follow Hushai's advice instead. Hushai's advice gave David time to escape across the Jordan River and eventually defeat Absalom's forces.

When Ahithophel saw that Absalom did not follow his advice, he hanged himself. He probably knew that Absalom would lose the battle ([2 Samuel 15:32–37](https://ref.ly/2Sam15:32-2Sam15:37); [16:15–17:23](https://ref.ly/2Sam16:15-2Sam17:23)). 

Hushai belonged to the Archite family from Ataroth, a town on the border of Ephraim and Benjamin ([Joshua 16:2, 7](https://ref.ly/Josh16:2,Josh16:7)).

* **Associated Passages:** JOS 16:2; JOS 16:7; 2SA 15:32–2SA 15:37; 2SA 16:15–2SA 17:23

