# Aquifer Open Bible Dictionary

**Tyndale Open Bible Dictionary: Aquifer Edition**

This work is an adaptation of *Tyndale Open Bible Dictionary* © 2023 Tyndale House Publishers, licensed under the CC BY\-SA 4\.0 license. The adaptation, *Aquifer Open Bible Dictionary*, was created by BiblioNexus and is also licensed under CC BY\-SA 4\.0\.

This resource has been adapted into multiple languages, including English, Tok Pisin, Arabic (عربي), French (Français), Hindi (हिंदी), Indonesian (Bahasa Indonesia), Portuguese (Português), Russian (Русский), Spanish (Español), Swahili (Kiswahili), and Simplified Chinese (简体中文).



--------------------------------

## Israelite (id: 6093)

ISRAELITE
=========

A descendant of the 12 sons of Israel. 

"Israel" is the name God gave to Jacob ([Genesis 32:28](https://ref.ly/Gen32:28)). The Israelites were different from two other family groups that came from Abraham. One group was the Ishmaelites, who came from Abraham's servant Hagar and her son Ishmael. The other group was the Edomites, who came from Jacob's brother Esau. The Israelites lived in Egypt from the time of Joseph until the exodus. Then God led them into Canaan to fulfill his promise to Abraham ([17:8](https://ref.ly/Gen17:8)).

God led the Israelites out of Egypt through the wilderness. Then he led them into the land of Canaan as he had promised them. Judges, kings, and conquerors from other countries ruled them. In 722 BC, Assyria conquered the northern kingdom. Then Israel became part of that empire. 

After this time, “Israel” refers to members of the southern tribes, Judah and Benjamin. An “Israelite” was one who belonged to the remnant of the covenant nation of Israel. This was true both in a religious and political sense.

*See also* Israel, History of; Jew; Judaism.

* **Associated Passages:** GEN 17:8; GEN 32:28
* **Associated Articles:** History of Israel (ID: `6092@TyndaleBibleDictionary`); Jew (ID: `6367@TyndaleBibleDictionary`); Judaism (ID: `6478@TyndaleBibleDictionary`)

