# Aquifer Open Bible Dictionary

**Tyndale Open Bible Dictionary: Aquifer Edition**

This work is an adaptation of *Tyndale Open Bible Dictionary* © 2023 Tyndale House Publishers, licensed under the CC BY\-SA 4\.0 license. The adaptation, *Aquifer Open Bible Dictionary*, was created by BiblioNexus and is also licensed under CC BY\-SA 4\.0\.

This resource has been adapted into multiple languages, including English, Tok Pisin, Arabic (عربي), French (Français), Hindi (हिंदी), Indonesian (Bahasa Indonesia), Portuguese (Português), Russian (Русский), Spanish (Español), Swahili (Kiswahili), and Simplified Chinese (简体中文).



--------------------------------

## Job (Person) (id: 6395)

JOB (Person)
============

1\. KJV rendering of Iob, an alternate form of Jashub, Issachar’s third son, in [Genesis 46:13](https://ref.ly/Gen46:13). *See* Jashub \#1.

2\. Central character of the book of Job. The intense suffering endured by Job provides the framework for the main theme of the book, which deals with the role of suffering in the life of a child of God.

The etymology of the name is difficult. Some have seen it as a derivative of a Hebrew word meaning “to be hostile” and have suggested that it reflects Job’s adamancy in refusing to bow to God’s will. The name occurs in several West Semitic texts as a proper name, however, and it seems best to understand it simply as a common name. The meaning of the name in West Semitic is either “no father” or “where is my father?”

The lack of certainty surrounding the authorship and geographical provenance of the book makes it difficult to place Job in history. The occurrence of Job’s name in [Ezekiel 14:14, 20](https://ref.ly/Ezek14:14,Ezek14:20) seems to support the possibility that he was a personage of great antiquity.

*See also* Job, Book of.

* **Associated Passages:** GEN 46:13; EZK 14:14; EZK 14:20
* **Associated Articles:** Jashub (ID: `6234@TyndaleBibleDictionary`); Book of Job (ID: `6394@TyndaleBibleDictionary`)

