# Aquifer Open Bible Dictionary

**Tyndale Open Bible Dictionary: Aquifer Edition**

This work is an adaptation of *Tyndale Open Bible Dictionary* © 2023 Tyndale House Publishers, licensed under the CC BY\-SA 4\.0 license. The adaptation, *Aquifer Open Bible Dictionary*, was created by BiblioNexus and is also licensed under CC BY\-SA 4\.0\.

This resource has been adapted into multiple languages, including English, Tok Pisin, Arabic (عربي), French (Français), Hindi (हिंदी), Indonesian (Bahasa Indonesia), Portuguese (Português), Russian (Русский), Spanish (Español), Swahili (Kiswahili), and Simplified Chinese (简体中文).



--------------------------------

## Kenath (id: 6547)

KENATH
======

Kenath was a town in the Hauran region. It was captured by a man named Nobah ([Numbers 32:42](https://ref.ly/Num32:42)). It was later captured by Geshur and Aram ([1 Chronicles 2:23](https://ref.ly/1Chr2:23)). 

Kenath was a Canaanite city. It appears in Egyptian curse texts from the 19th and 18th centuries BC. The city was also conquered by the Egyptian pharaoh Thutmose III and is mentioned in the Amarna letters (ancient diplomatic correspondence).. 

During the Hellenistic period (the time after Alexander the Great), Kenath became one of the cities of the Decapolis (a group of ten cities). Jewish people who returned from exile in Babylon settled there. The Jewish religious teachers (rabbis) considered it a border town of the promised land. Kenath was also called Kanatha.

*See also* Kanatha.

* **Associated Passages:** NUM 32:42; 1CH 2:23
* **Associated Articles:** Kanatha (ID: `6519@TyndaleBibleDictionary`)

