# Aquifer Open Bible Dictionary

**Tyndale Open Bible Dictionary: Aquifer Edition**

This work is an adaptation of *Tyndale Open Bible Dictionary* © 2023 Tyndale House Publishers, licensed under the CC BY\-SA 4\.0 license. The adaptation, *Aquifer Open Bible Dictionary*, was created by BiblioNexus and is also licensed under CC BY\-SA 4\.0\.

This resource has been adapted into multiple languages, including English, Tok Pisin, Arabic (عربي), French (Français), Hindi (हिंदी), Indonesian (Bahasa Indonesia), Portuguese (Português), Russian (Русский), Spanish (Español), Swahili (Kiswahili), and Simplified Chinese (简体中文).



--------------------------------

## Kedorlaomer (id: 6532)

KEDORLAOMER
===========

King of Elam who participated with three other kings in a campaign against five cities near the southern end of the Dead Sea plain ([Gn 14](https://ref.ly/Gen14:1-Gen14:24)). Although Kedorlaomer is initially third in the list (v [1](https://ref.ly/Gen14:1)), he was evidently the leader of the four kings. Elsewhere in the chapter his name comes first or stands alone.

For 12 years the five cities of the plain were vassals of Kedorlaomer. In the 13th year the cities rebelled, and the next year Kedorlaomer enlisted allies to enforce his lordship. The victorious kings looted the cities and took prisoners. Because the patriarch Abram’s nephew Lot was among the captives, Abram mustered his servants and allies and pursued Kedorlaomer as far as Damascus. Kedorlaomer was defeated, and the captured loot and prisoners were rescued.

The first half of the name Kedorlaomer is a common Elamite word meaning “servant.” The second half is probably the name of an Elamite deity. Although both elements of the name are known outside the Bible, the combination is not. It fits, however, with an early second\-millennium BC date for the encounter, coinciding with the biblical account.

* **Associated Passages:** GEN 14:1; GEN 14:1–GEN 14:24

