# Aquifer Open Bible Dictionary

**Tyndale Open Bible Dictionary: Aquifer Edition**

This work is an adaptation of *Tyndale Open Bible Dictionary* © 2023 Tyndale House Publishers, licensed under the CC BY\-SA 4\.0 license. The adaptation, *Aquifer Open Bible Dictionary*, was created by BiblioNexus and is also licensed under CC BY\-SA 4\.0\.

This resource has been adapted into multiple languages, including English, Tok Pisin, Arabic (عربي), French (Français), Hindi (हिंदी), Indonesian (Bahasa Indonesia), Portuguese (Português), Russian (Русский), Spanish (Español), Swahili (Kiswahili), and Simplified Chinese (简体中文).



--------------------------------

## Julius (id: 6499)

JULIUS
======

Roman centurion of the Augustan cohort who escorted the apostle Paul and other prisoners from Palestine to Rome ([Acts 27:1](https://ref.ly/Acts27:1)). Jewish leaders in Jerusalem accused Paul of teaching false doctrine and defiling the temple. Because indecision by two successive Roman governors kept Paul in prison for more than two years, he finally appealed to Caesar. Julius was a kind man. He allowed Paul to leave the ship in Sidon to be comforted by his friends (v [3](https://ref.ly/Acts27:3)). However, in his eagerness to get his prisoners to Rome, Julius ignored Paul’s advice to spend the winter in Fair Havens. Instead, he ordered the ship to sail to Phoenix, another harbor in Crete, which was more suitable for harboring in winter (vv [9–12](https://ref.ly/Acts27:9-Acts27:12)). During the trip, a storm wrecked the ship. The soldiers on board wanted to kill the prisoners for fear of their escaping, but Julius prevented that massacre, ordering all to jump ship and swim to shore. This decision spared Paul’s life (vv [42–44](https://ref.ly/Acts27:42-Acts27:44)). Some scholars have conjectured that Julius was the soldier who stayed with Paul in Rome ([28:16](https://ref.ly/Acts28:16)).

* **Associated Passages:** ACT 27:1; ACT 27:3; ACT 28:16; ACT 27:9–ACT 27:12; ACT 27:42–ACT 27:44

