# Aquifer Open Bible Dictionary

**Tyndale Open Bible Dictionary: Aquifer Edition**

This work is an adaptation of *Tyndale Open Bible Dictionary* © 2023 Tyndale House Publishers, licensed under the CC BY\-SA 4\.0 license. The adaptation, *Aquifer Open Bible Dictionary*, was created by BiblioNexus and is also licensed under CC BY\-SA 4\.0\.

This resource has been adapted into multiple languages, including English, Tok Pisin, Arabic (عربي), French (Français), Hindi (हिंदी), Indonesian (Bahasa Indonesia), Portuguese (Português), Russian (Русский), Spanish (Español), Swahili (Kiswahili), and Simplified Chinese (简体中文).



--------------------------------

## Jupiter (id: 6502)

JUPITER
=======

Jupiter is the supreme god in Roman beliefs. He is the same as Zeus in Greek mythology. Jupiter was the son Saturn and husband and brother of Juno. 

Jupiter (also called "Jove") was the god of destiny. His weapon was the thunderbolt. The people considered the eagle, oak tree, and olive tree holy in his worship. A temple of Jupiter stood in Rome on the Capitoline Hill. During the time when Hadrian ruled (from AD 117–138\), the people built a temple of Jupiter Capitolinus on top of the ruins of the Jewish temple in Jerusalem.

During their first missionary journey, the apostles Barnabas and Paul went to Lystra. The people of Lystra thought they were gods who had come down to visit them ([Acts 14:12–13](https://ref.ly/Acts14:12-Acts14:13)). They thought Barnabas was Zeus (or Jupiter) and Paul was Hermes (or Mercury).

* **Associated Passages:** ACT 14:12–ACT 14:13

