# Aquifer Open Bible Dictionary

**Tyndale Open Bible Dictionary: Aquifer Edition**

This work is an adaptation of *Tyndale Open Bible Dictionary* © 2023 Tyndale House Publishers, licensed under the CC BY\-SA 4\.0 license. The adaptation, *Aquifer Open Bible Dictionary*, was created by BiblioNexus and is also licensed under CC BY\-SA 4\.0\.

This resource has been adapted into multiple languages, including English, Tok Pisin, Arabic (عربي), French (Français), Hindi (हिंदी), Indonesian (Bahasa Indonesia), Portuguese (Português), Russian (Русский), Spanish (Español), Swahili (Kiswahili), and Simplified Chinese (简体中文).



--------------------------------

## Judgment, Hall of (id: 6493)

JUDGMENT, Hall of
=================

The King James Version translation of the New Testament word *praitorion* in [John 18:28, 33](https://ref.ly/John18:28,John18:33); [19:9](https://ref.ly/John19:9); [Acts 23:35](https://ref.ly/Acts23:35). Some Bible versions translate this word as “Praetorium.“ Others translate it as “common hall.“

The word was first used for the place where the Roman general’s tent stood in an army camp. It was a reference to the main office of the camp. It then came to mean the military council that met in the general’s tent. Later, it was used for to the palace where the Roman governor or procurator lived while ruling a region. It also identified the army's main office and camp that housed the army in connection with the governor’s living place. 

In Jerusalem, it was the palace that Herod the Great had built for himself. When the Roman governor came from his normal house in Caesarea to Jerusalem, he lived in Herod’s palace. He did his official business there. It was there that Pilate questioned Jesus ([John 18:28](https://ref.ly/John18:28); [19:9](https://ref.ly/John19:9)). It was at another place called the “Pavement” where Pilate sat in judgment and gave Jesus to the Jews.

* **Associated Passages:** MAT 27:27; MRK 15:16; JHN 18:28; JHN 18:33; JHN 19:9; ACT 23:35

