# Aquifer Open Bible Dictionary

**Tyndale Open Bible Dictionary: Aquifer Edition**

This work is an adaptation of *Tyndale Open Bible Dictionary* © 2023 Tyndale House Publishers, licensed under the CC BY\-SA 4\.0 license. The adaptation, *Aquifer Open Bible Dictionary*, was created by BiblioNexus and is also licensed under CC BY\-SA 4\.0\.

This resource has been adapted into multiple languages, including English, Tok Pisin, Arabic (عربي), French (Français), Hindi (हिंदी), Indonesian (Bahasa Indonesia), Portuguese (Português), Russian (Русский), Spanish (Español), Swahili (Kiswahili), and Simplified Chinese (简体中文).



--------------------------------

## Lees (id: 6714)

LEES\*
======

Thick substance, or dregs, that forms at the bottom of a wine container as fermentation takes place.

The term appears in three different situations in the OT, each apparently representing a particular phase of fermentation. [Isaiah 25:6](https://ref.ly/Isa25:6) refers to wine at its best (“well\-aged,” nlt) after a proper fermentation: strong, clear, and filtered. “Wines on the lees” in context refers to the blessings of peace and plenty that God’s people will enjoy in the age to come. [Jeremiah 48:11](https://ref.ly/Jer48:11) and [Zephaniah 1:12](https://ref.ly/Zeph1:12) refer to wine that is overfermented, having become syrupy in appearance and weak and bland in taste. Figuratively, the term applies to the Jews and Moabites about to receive impending judgment for having allowed themselves to be lulled into an ungodly indolent and indifferent life style. [Psalm 75:8](https://ref.ly/Ps75:8) uses “dregs” to refer to the bitter sediments and grounds left after the wine has been poured out, which the ungodly will be forced to consume.

* **Associated Passages:** PSA 75:8; ISA 25:6; JER 48:11; ZEP 1:12

