# Aquifer Open Bible Dictionary

**Tyndale Open Bible Dictionary: Aquifer Edition**

This work is an adaptation of *Tyndale Open Bible Dictionary* © 2023 Tyndale House Publishers, licensed under the CC BY\-SA 4\.0 license. The adaptation, *Aquifer Open Bible Dictionary*, was created by BiblioNexus and is also licensed under CC BY\-SA 4\.0\.

This resource has been adapted into multiple languages, including English, Tok Pisin, Arabic (عربي), French (Français), Hindi (हिंदी), Indonesian (Bahasa Indonesia), Portuguese (Português), Russian (Русский), Spanish (Español), Swahili (Kiswahili), and Simplified Chinese (简体中文).



--------------------------------

## Lintel (Top of a Doorframe) (id: 6757)

LINTEL (Top of a Doorframe)
===========================

A lintel is a horizontal beam placed above a doorway. It sits on top of the vertical supports called "doorposts." Some Bible translations use the term "lintel" while many modern translations often use more familiar terms like "top of the doorframe."

In [Exodus 12](https://ref.ly/Exod12:1-Exod12:51), the Israelites must prepare for the tenth plague, death, and for the first Passover. After killing a lamb, the people were to take the blood and “put it on the sides and tops of the doorframes of the houses” ([Exodus 12:7](https://ref.ly/Exod12:7)).

[First Kings 6:31](https://ref.ly/1Kgs6:31) describes Solomon’s building of the temple. The King James Version says, “He made doors of olive tree: the lintel and side posts were a fifth part of the wall.” The meaning of this verse in the Hebrew is a little difficult to determine. The New American Standard Bible translates it as “the lintel and five\-sided doorposts.” The New English Bible replaces the word “lintel” with “pilasters.” The Berean Standard Bible translates it as "doors of olive wood with five\-sided doorposts." It is possible that the top of the doorway was slanted, formed by beams leaning toward each other (like an arch) instead of one horizontal beam.

In [Amos 9:1](https://ref.ly/Amos9:1)the King James Version has “lintel,” whereas the Revised Standard Version has “capital.” The Berean Standard Bible simply has "tops of the pillars." The Hebrew word here seems to mean the top part of a column. The same is true in [Zephaniah 2:14](https://ref.ly/Zeph2:14), where the King James Version has “lintels” and the Berean Standard Bible has “atop her pillars.” 

*See* Architecture.

* **Associated Passages:** EXO 12:7; 1KI 6:31; AMO 9:1; ZEP 2:14; EXO 12:1–EXO 12:51
* **Associated Articles:** Architecture (ID: `3720@TyndaleBibleDictionary`)

