# Aquifer Open Bible Dictionary

**Tyndale Open Bible Dictionary: Aquifer Edition**

This work is an adaptation of *Tyndale Open Bible Dictionary* © 2023 Tyndale House Publishers, licensed under the CC BY\-SA 4\.0 license. The adaptation, *Aquifer Open Bible Dictionary*, was created by BiblioNexus and is also licensed under CC BY\-SA 4\.0\.

This resource has been adapted into multiple languages, including English, Tok Pisin, Arabic (عربي), French (Français), Hindi (हिंदी), Indonesian (Bahasa Indonesia), Portuguese (Português), Russian (Русский), Spanish (Español), Swahili (Kiswahili), and Simplified Chinese (简体中文).



--------------------------------

## Liver (id: 6762)

LIVER
=====

A large organ in the abdomen that performs many functions necessary for life. The writer of Proverbs knew how important the liver was for life when he wrote that an arrow wound to the liver would cause death ([Proverbs 7:23](https://ref.ly/Prov7:23)). In the Bible, the liver is most often mentioned when describing animal sacrifices ([Exodus 29:13, 22](https://ref.ly/Exod29:13,Exod29:22); [Leviticus 3:4, 10, 15](https://ref.ly/Lev3:4,Lev3:10,Lev3:15)).

In ancient Babylon, sheep liver was sometimes used for fortune\-telling. Each tiny detail of the liver was examined for omens. Archaeologists have recovered bronze and baked\-clay models of sheep livers. They date to the 16th century BC. Evidently this is the use of the liver made by the king of Babylon in [Ezekiel 21:21](https://ref.ly/Ezek21:21). This use of the sheep liver was popular until the Greeks. It rivaled astrology for many centuries.

* **Associated Passages:** EXO 29:13; EXO 29:22; LEV 3:4; LEV 3:10; LEV 3:15; PRO 7:23; EZK 21:21

