# Aquifer Open Bible Dictionary

**Tyndale Open Bible Dictionary: Aquifer Edition**

This work is an adaptation of *Tyndale Open Bible Dictionary* © 2023 Tyndale House Publishers, licensed under the CC BY\-SA 4\.0 license. The adaptation, *Aquifer Open Bible Dictionary*, was created by BiblioNexus and is also licensed under CC BY\-SA 4\.0\.

This resource has been adapted into multiple languages, including English, Tok Pisin, Arabic (عربي), French (Français), Hindi (हिंदी), Indonesian (Bahasa Indonesia), Portuguese (Português), Russian (Русский), Spanish (Español), Swahili (Kiswahili), and Simplified Chinese (简体中文).



--------------------------------

## Magic (id: 6853)

MAGIC
=====

Magic is an attempt to influence or control people or events through supernatural forces. People try to use these forces by performing ceremonies, saying special words (spells), using charms, and performing rituals.

Several terms in the Bible might be considered forms of magic. Several of these terms are mentioned in [Deuteronomy 18:9–14](https://ref.ly/Deut18:9-Deut18:14). God does not allow the people of Israel to practice magic or occult activities. God's people should avoid magical practices because God communicates with them directly through his prophets. Human magical practices can create false hope or false fear and lead people away from God's truth. Although magical practices cannot match the accuracy of God's prophets, the Bible suggests there might be some supernatural reality behind certain magical practices.

Magic in the Old Testament
--------------------------

IMagicians appear in the Old Testament book of Exodus, where the magicians of Egypt compete against Moses. The Bible does not dismiss the magicians' initial success as mere tricks, since they were partly successful at first ([Exodus 7–8](https://ref.ly/Exod7:1-Exod8:32)). But their failures begin to become clear in [Exodus 8–](https://ref.ly/Exod8:1-Exod8:32)[9](https://ref.ly/Exod9:1-Exod9:35). The Bible does not completely deny that evil supernatural power might work through a magician. What the Bible makes clear is that this power does not agree with God's will and cannot defeat it.

Magic in the New Testament
--------------------------

In the New Testament, magic is addressed in the book of Acts. When Philip went to Samaria, he met Simon the magician. Simon had gained much attention by amazing people with his magic ([Acts 8:11](https://ref.ly/Acts8:11)). After hearing Philip's message, many believed in God and began following him. Simon saw the wonderful things Philip could do and thought these powers came through the ritual of laying on hands. Philip explained that these wonders could not be purchased but came as a gracious gift from God to those who are sorry for their sins.

Another important passage is [Acts 19:11–20](https://ref.ly/Acts19:11-Acts19:20). Here, some Jewish exorcists tried to use Jesus’s name in their work. Instead, the man the evil spirit lived in attacked them. He overpowered them and they ran out of that house naked and hurt. This shows that the power behind the apostles' miracles was based on their personal relationship with Jesus Christ. After this incident, the people of Ephesus had to choose between the word of the Lord and their magical practices. Some brought their books together and burned them in front of everyone. This display of God’s power and the need for loyalty to him helped spread the good news about Jesus further.

The Bible's position against magic is stated strongly in the last book of the Bible, the book of Revelation. Sorcerers are condemned to the lake of fire ([Revelation 21:8](https://ref.ly/Rev21:8)). The Bible consistently opposes magic. It does not rule out the possibility that Satan can use magic for evil purposes. Magical practices are condemned because they may lead to false hope or false fear and draw people away from loyalty to God's Word.

*See also* Amulet; Canaanite Deities and Religion; Frontlet; Omen; Soothsayer; Sorcery; Psychics.

* **Associated Passages:** ACT 8:11; REV 21:8; ACT 19:11–ACT 19:20; EXO 8:1–EXO 8:32; DEU 18:9–DEU 18:14; EXO 7:1–EXO 8:32; EXO 9:1–EXO 9:35
* **Associated Articles:** Amulet (ID: `3581@TyndaleBibleDictionary`); Canaanite Deities and Religion (ID: `4405@TyndaleBibleDictionary`); Omen (ID: `7487@TyndaleBibleDictionary`); Soothsayer (ID: `8577@TyndaleBibleDictionary`); Frontlet (ID: `5312@TyndaleBibleDictionary`); Psychics (ID: `7844@TyndaleBibleDictionary`); Sorcery (ID: `8581@TyndaleBibleDictionary`)

