# Aquifer Open Bible Dictionary

**Tyndale Open Bible Dictionary: Aquifer Edition**

This work is an adaptation of *Tyndale Open Bible Dictionary* © 2023 Tyndale House Publishers, licensed under the CC BY\-SA 4\.0 license. The adaptation, *Aquifer Open Bible Dictionary*, was created by BiblioNexus and is also licensed under CC BY\-SA 4\.0\.

This resource has been adapted into multiple languages, including English, Tok Pisin, Arabic (عربي), French (Français), Hindi (हिंदी), Indonesian (Bahasa Indonesia), Portuguese (Português), Russian (Русский), Spanish (Español), Swahili (Kiswahili), and Simplified Chinese (简体中文).



--------------------------------

## Lud, Ludim, Ludites (id: 6791)

LUD, LUDIM\*, LUDITES
=====================

Names occurring in the table of nations in [Genesis 10](https://ref.ly/Gen10:1-Gen10:32). Ludim is listed as the first son of Mizraim, and Lud is listed as the fourth son of Shem. On the basis of this, it is probably better to consider them as having different ethnic origins. Some, however, have suggested that both names refer to a people of Asia Minor, the Lydians, who are mentioned on Ashurbanipal’s inscriptions as *Luddu.* There is little question that Lud, at least, is to be associated with Lydia. Josephus makes this identification (*Antiquities* 1\.6\.4\.). In [Isaiah 66:19](https://ref.ly/Isa66:19), it is listed among other nations of Asia Minor.

Lud is often mentioned in contexts that suggest the men were well known as good soldiers. According to [Jeremiah 46:9](https://ref.ly/Jer46:9), they fought with the Egyptians against the Babylonians at the battle of Carchemish in 605 BC. In the lament over Tyre in [Ezekiel 27:10](https://ref.ly/Ezek27:10), they are listed among others who were mercenaries in the army of Tyre. Perhaps [Ezekiel 30:5](https://ref.ly/Ezek30:5) is another case of Lydians serving as mercenaries—this time in the Egyptian army. Such military aid to Egypt goes back to the Assyrian period when Gyges sent military aid to Psammetichus of Egypt against the Assyrians.

*See also* Lydia (Place).

* **Associated Passages:** ISA 66:19; JER 46:9; EZK 27:10; EZK 30:5; GEN 10:1–GEN 10:32
* **Associated Articles:** Lydia (Place) (ID: `6801@TyndaleBibleDictionary`)

