# Aquifer Open Bible Dictionary

**Tyndale Open Bible Dictionary: Aquifer Edition**

This work is an adaptation of *Tyndale Open Bible Dictionary* © 2023 Tyndale House Publishers, licensed under the CC BY\-SA 4\.0 license. The adaptation, *Aquifer Open Bible Dictionary*, was created by BiblioNexus and is also licensed under CC BY\-SA 4\.0\.

This resource has been adapted into multiple languages, including English, Tok Pisin, Arabic (عربي), French (Français), Hindi (हिंदी), Indonesian (Bahasa Indonesia), Portuguese (Português), Russian (Русский), Spanish (Español), Swahili (Kiswahili), and Simplified Chinese (简体中文).



--------------------------------

## Lotus Bush, Lotus Tree (id: 6784)

LOTUS BUSH, LOTUS TREE
======================

A lotus bush or tree (*Zizyphus lotus*) is a shrub or low tree that grows to a height of about 1\.5 meters (5 feet). It has smooth, zigzag branches that are whitish in color. The "lotus plants" in [Job 40:21–22](https://ref.ly/Job40:21-Job40:22) may refer to the lotus bush. 

Other scholars believe that the plants in Job refer to large\-leafed trees such as the plane tree, *Platanus orientalis*, or the oleander, *Nerium oleander*. This idea is based on the belief that the animal described in [Job 40](https://ref.ly/Job40:1-Job40:24) is the hippopotamus. These scholars think it is unlikely that a hippopotamus would live under a lotus bush or even be found in places where this shrub grows. They consider the plane tree or the oleander to be more likely choices.

* **Associated Passages:** JOB 40:21–JOB 40:22
* **Associated Articles:** Plants (ID: `7761@Unknown`)

