# Aquifer Open Bible Dictionary

**Tyndale Open Bible Dictionary: Aquifer Edition**

This work is an adaptation of *Tyndale Open Bible Dictionary* © 2023 Tyndale House Publishers, licensed under the CC BY\-SA 4\.0 license. The adaptation, *Aquifer Open Bible Dictionary*, was created by BiblioNexus and is also licensed under CC BY\-SA 4\.0\.

This resource has been adapted into multiple languages, including English, Tok Pisin, Arabic (عربي), French (Français), Hindi (हिंदी), Indonesian (Bahasa Indonesia), Portuguese (Português), Russian (Русский), Spanish (Español), Swahili (Kiswahili), and Simplified Chinese (简体中文).



--------------------------------

## Marah (id: 6935)

MARAH
=====

A spring (a natural source of water coming up from the ground) where the water was too bitter to drink. Marah was the first place where the Israelites camped after they crossed the Red Sea ([Exodus 15:23](https://ref.ly/Exod15:23); [Numbers 33:8–9](https://ref.ly/Num33:8-Num33:9)). Today, many scholars believe Marah was located at a place now called 'Ain Hawarah. It is a pool of bitter water on the eastern coastal plain of the Gulf of Suez. It is about 70\.8 kilometers (44 miles) southeast of Suez, and eight kilometers (five miles) northwest of 'Ain Gharandel. It is south of Wadi Amarah, a dry riverbed whose name might come from the ancient name Marah.

*See also* Wilderness Wanderings.

* **Associated Passages:** EXO 15:23; NUM 33:8–NUM 33:9
* **Associated Articles:** Wilderness Wanderings (ID: `9063@TyndaleBibleDictionary`)

