# Aquifer Open Bible Dictionary

**Tyndale Open Bible Dictionary: Aquifer Edition**

This work is an adaptation of *Tyndale Open Bible Dictionary* © 2023 Tyndale House Publishers, licensed under the CC BY\-SA 4\.0 license. The adaptation, *Aquifer Open Bible Dictionary*, was created by BiblioNexus and is also licensed under CC BY\-SA 4\.0\.

This resource has been adapted into multiple languages, including English, Tok Pisin, Arabic (عربي), French (Français), Hindi (हिंदी), Indonesian (Bahasa Indonesia), Portuguese (Português), Russian (Русский), Spanish (Español), Swahili (Kiswahili), and Simplified Chinese (简体中文).



--------------------------------

## Mammon (id: 6910)

MAMMON
======

An Aramaic word meaning wealth or property. The Gospel writers wrote it in Greek letters. 

Some English translations preserve the Greek form of the word in English (King James Version, Revised Standard Version, New American Standard Bible). Meanwhile, others translate it with the words “wealth” or “money” (New English Bible, Today's English Version, New International Version, New Living Translation). In [Matthew 6:24](https://ref.ly/Matt6:24) and [Luke 16:13](https://ref.ly/Luke16:13), “mammon” is rivalled against God for his disciple's loyalty: Which master will they be obedient to? In [Luke 16:9–11](https://ref.ly/Luke16:9-Luke16:11) the term designates material wealth or property. Mammon has no negative value. Luke 16:11 makes this clear. It says: “If you have not been faithful with worldly wealth, who will entrust you with true riches?”

* **Associated Passages:** MAT 6:24; LUK 16:11; LUK 16:13; LUK 16:9–LUK 16:11

