# Aquifer Open Bible Dictionary

**Tyndale Open Bible Dictionary: Aquifer Edition**

This work is an adaptation of *Tyndale Open Bible Dictionary* © 2023 Tyndale House Publishers, licensed under the CC BY\-SA 4\.0 license. The adaptation, *Aquifer Open Bible Dictionary*, was created by BiblioNexus and is also licensed under CC BY\-SA 4\.0\.

This resource has been adapted into multiple languages, including English, Tok Pisin, Arabic (عربي), French (Français), Hindi (हिंदी), Indonesian (Bahasa Indonesia), Portuguese (Português), Russian (Русский), Spanish (Español), Swahili (Kiswahili), and Simplified Chinese (简体中文).



--------------------------------

## Myrrh (id: 7253)

MYRRH
=====

A fragrant gum resin obtained from various shrubs or small trees. It is used in perfume and incense.

Most Bible references to myrrh likely refer to *Commiphora myrrha*. But the Bible might also refer to *Commiphora kataf* might since it grows in the same region and is similar. Both trees are native to Arabia, Ethiopia, and the east African coast of Somalia. These trees produce a gummy substance that makes up most of the myrrh sold commercially.

Both species are low, scrubby shrubs or small trees with thick, stiff branches and thorns. They grow in rocky areas, especially on limestone hills.

In eastern cultures, myrrh is highly valued as a fragrant substance, perfume, and medicine. The ancient Egyptians burned it in their temples and used it to preserve their dead bodies. The Jews also used myrrh for preparing bodies for burial ([John 19:39](https://ref.ly/John19:39)). The Hebrew people valued myrrh highly as a perfume ([Psalm 45:8](https://ref.ly/Ps45:8)).

* **Associated Articles:** Plants (ID: `7761@Unknown`)

