# Aquifer Open Bible Dictionary

**Tyndale Open Bible Dictionary: Aquifer Edition**

This work is an adaptation of *Tyndale Open Bible Dictionary* © 2023 Tyndale House Publishers, licensed under the CC BY\-SA 4\.0 license. The adaptation, *Aquifer Open Bible Dictionary*, was created by BiblioNexus and is also licensed under CC BY\-SA 4\.0\.

This resource has been adapted into multiple languages, including English, Tok Pisin, Arabic (عربي), French (Français), Hindi (हिंदी), Indonesian (Bahasa Indonesia), Portuguese (Português), Russian (Русский), Spanish (Español), Swahili (Kiswahili), and Simplified Chinese (简体中文).



--------------------------------

## Mizraim (id: 7180)

MIZRAIM
=======

A Hebrew word for the land of Egypt and/or its people. Yet, some scholars suggest that Mizraim refers to a site either on the Edomite border or in northern Syria. 

[Genesis 10:6](https://ref.ly/Gen10:6) identifies Mizraim (Egypt) as one of the sons of Ham who settled south of Canaan. [Genesis 10:14](https://ref.ly/Gen10:14) and [Isaiah 11:11](https://ref.ly/Isa11:11) distinguish Mizraim from Pathrushim (Upper Egypt). Upper Egypt is the southern half of the United Kingdom of Egypt. There are almost 700 known references to Mizraim. Yet, in the majority of references, there is no distinction between the two parts of the kingdom. The term refers to the Egyptian territory.

*See also* Egypt, Egyptian.

* **Associated Passages:** GEN 10:6; GEN 10:14; ISA 11:11
* **Associated Articles:** Egypt, Egyptian (ID: `4954@TyndaleBibleDictionary`)

