# Aquifer Open Bible Dictionary

**Tyndale Open Bible Dictionary: Aquifer Edition**

This work is an adaptation of *Tyndale Open Bible Dictionary* © 2023 Tyndale House Publishers, licensed under the CC BY\-SA 4\.0 license. The adaptation, *Aquifer Open Bible Dictionary*, was created by BiblioNexus and is also licensed under CC BY\-SA 4\.0\.

This resource has been adapted into multiple languages, including English, Tok Pisin, Arabic (عربي), French (Français), Hindi (हिंदी), Indonesian (Bahasa Indonesia), Portuguese (Português), Russian (Русский), Spanish (Español), Swahili (Kiswahili), and Simplified Chinese (简体中文).



--------------------------------

## Nebo (Deity) (id: 7328)

NEBO (Deity)
============

Nebo was an important god of ancient Babylon. The Babylonians spelled his name as "Nabu," while the Hebrew Bible spells it as "Nebo." He was considered the son of Marduk, who was the chief god of Babylon.

Nebo was known as the god of wisdom, education, and writing. He first served as the main god of a city called Borsippa. As the Babylonian Empire grew larger, more people began to worship Nebo.

Many ancient writings show that the kings of Babylon and Assyria greatly respected Nebo. They built a special temple for him and his partner, Tashmit, in the city of Kalkhi (now called Nimrud), which was once the capital of Assyria.

In the Bible, the prophet Isaiah wrote about Nebo. He mocked this god, saying that Nebo could not even save himself from being captured ([Isaiah 46:1](https://ref.ly/Isa46:1)). 

*See* Babylon, Babylonia.

* **Associated Passages:** ISA 46:1
* **Associated Articles:** Babylon, Babylonia (ID: `3957@TyndaleBibleDictionary`)

