# Aquifer Open Bible Dictionary

**Tyndale Open Bible Dictionary: Aquifer Edition**

This work is an adaptation of *Tyndale Open Bible Dictionary* © 2023 Tyndale House Publishers, licensed under the CC BY\-SA 4\.0 license. The adaptation, *Aquifer Open Bible Dictionary*, was created by BiblioNexus and is also licensed under CC BY\-SA 4\.0\.

This resource has been adapted into multiple languages, including English, Tok Pisin, Arabic (عربي), French (Français), Hindi (हिंदी), Indonesian (Bahasa Indonesia), Portuguese (Português), Russian (Русский), Spanish (Español), Swahili (Kiswahili), and Simplified Chinese (简体中文).



--------------------------------

## Nile River (id: 7404)

NILE RIVER
==========

Life\-giving river of Egypt in northeast Africa. Perhaps no other river has been so vital to the history of the nation through which it flows. With an attributed length of some 4,160 miles (6,693\.4 kilometers), the Nile is the longest river in the world, although its drainage system is ranked third (other sources say sixth) in area (nearly 1\.3 million square miles, or 3\.4 million square kilometers).

The origin and meaning of the name “Nile” are unknown. To the ancient Egyptians the Nile was simply “the river.” The Egyptians found it hard to conceive of any river different from the Nile, so when they reached the Euphrates, they assumed it was running backward, since it flowed south, whereas the Nile flows north.

Unusual Features
----------------

Among the characteristics that distinguish the Nile are its six cataracts, areas where the river has failed to erode a clear channel through hard rock formations. These are numbered from north to south, in order of their discovery by modern explorers. The first cataract is at Aswan in Egypt, near the famous islands of Elephantine and Philae. The other five cataracts lie in the Sudan, with the second just above the city of Wadi Halfa.

Another distinguishing feature of the Nile is that it flows from south to north. This was of importance to Egyptian river transport, for sailing vessels could take advantage of the prevailing north wind for going upstream, while the current propelled travelers downstream.

The Nile River determined the three seasons of about four months each: (1\) inundation (mid\-July to mid\-November); (2\) winter (mid\-November to mid\-March); (3\) summer (mid\-March to mid\-July).

The inundation culminated in late October, softening the soil of the agricultural land for planting.

Course and Tributaries
----------------------

The Nile has two main streams named for their respective colors, the White Nile and the Blue Nile. These streams owe their existence to the annual rains in equatorial Africa.

The White Nile has its origin in the lake country. Lake Victoria is usually said to be its source, but some geographers pinpoint the source as a little stream that flows into the lake. The only outlet at Lake Victoria is the Victoria Nile, northeast of the lake at Ripon Falls.

The most important junction of the river is at Khartoum, where the Blue Nile and White Nile are united. At this point one can often clearly see the color difference in the waters of the two rivers.

The Blue Nile, only about 850 miles (1,367\.7 kilometers) long, originates at Lake Tana in the highlands of Ethiopia. A much more precipitous stream than the White Nile, it is also dependent upon the rainy season in the high country. The White Nile begins its flooding first, but when the onrush of the Blue Nile sets in, it holds in check the water of the White Nile. During flood season, the Blue Nile has twice the volume of the White Nile and provides the greater part of the alluvium that built up the soil of Egypt.

To the north of Khartoum is the sixth cataract, the first of the natural barriers. The Atbara, the last tributary of the Nile, enters from the east. At the fourth cataract, near Napata, is a group of cemeteries and ruins associated with the Ethiopian or Kushite (25th) dynasty of Egypt. Farther downstream is the important archaeological site of Kerma, where the Egyptians maintained a trading post during the Middle Kingdom.

Downstream from the second cataract is the celebrated temple of Abu Simbel, the work of Ramses II, with the smaller temple honoring Nefertari, his wife. These temples were moved to the cliff above their original position before Lake Nasser engulfed the site.

Just above Aswan and the first cataract is the new High Dam and the older Aswan Dam. Between the two dams is the island of Philae, with its well\-known temples. A short distance above the Delta lies Cairo and the Giza pyramids, and farther south are the ruins of Memphis, the first capital of Egypt.

The Delta measures some 125 by 115 miles (201\.1 by 185\.0 kilometers). Seven ancient streams of the Nile found their way into the sea, but there are only two modern ones: the Rosetta on the west, which gave the name to the Rosetta Stone, and the Damietta to the East.

Importance to Egypt
-------------------

Without the water of the river, life would be impossible in northeast Africa, and the civilizations of Egypt could not have come into being. The Greek writers, first Hecataeus and later Herodotus, commented that Egypt is the gift of the Nile. The fertile soil of Egypt, which has produced such abundant crops over so long a span of time, is the alluvium laid down by the river over the course of centuries. Not only was the river the source of the soil itself, but with the annual inundation the Nile fertilized the land by bringing down new alluvium and by depositing organic materials. At the same time, the inundation thoroughly soaked the soil, so that it was possible to produce good crops with a minimum of effort expended on irrigation.

The Nile also satisfied many personal needs of the people, providing drinking water and a washing place for both the people and their clothing. In ancient times, even members of the royal family came to the river to bathe (see [Ex 2:5](https://ref.ly/Exod2:5); [8:20](https://ref.ly/Exod8:20)).

The Nile teemed with fish and waterfowl, and sport fishing (mostly spearfishing) and waterfowling were traditional diversions of the upper classes. Fish and fowl were also regular food, especially for the wealthy. A more hazardous sport, in which nobles traditionally engaged, was the hunting of hippopotami in reed watercraft with harpoons.

The Nile was the primary means of communication, with boats plying up and down its channels. Riverboats of large size moved goods from one end to the other. The building of temples, palaces, and tombs throughout the land demanded the moving of granite for hundreds of miles along the river.

The river was also a feature of the religious life of the Egyptians. The river was deified in the form of the god Hapi, a man who is shown in the various forms of art as having pendulous breasts and a somewhat corpulent body, probably to represent luxuriant overabundance, along with the fish and vegetation from the river.

The Nile and the Bible
----------------------

The biblical references to the Nile River are naturally found in those parts of the Bible that have to do directly with Egypt, which means that many occur in the Joseph narrative in the latter part of Genesis and in the account of the Israelite bondage in Egypt and subsequent exodus in the early chapters of Exodus.

The first reference to the Nile appears in the mysterious dream of Pharaoh ([Gn 41](https://ref.ly/Gen41:1-Gen41:57)). In his dream the king stood on the riverbank and saw seven well\-fed cows, followed by seven lean cows, which came out of the river and devoured the fat cattle (cf. [41:1–4, 17–21](https://ref.ly/Gen41:1-Gen41:4,Gen41:17-Gen41:21)). This agrees with grazing practices of ancient Egypt and coincides with the depiction of cattle on the funerary monuments.

During the sojourn in Egypt, when the Israelites multiplied and became a possible threat to Egyptian security, Pharaoh decreed that every Israelite male child should be thrown into the river upon birth ([Ex 1:22](https://ref.ly/Exod1:22)). This led to the events that marked the early life of Moses.

Moses declared the judgments of the Lord at the river ([7:15](https://ref.ly/Exod7:15); [8:20](https://ref.ly/Exod8:20)). The first plague, the turning of water to blood ([7:15–24](https://ref.ly/Exod7:15-Exod7:24); [17:5](https://ref.ly/Exod17:5); [Ps 78:44](https://ref.ly/Ps78:44)), was directed against the river and against the Nile god, Hapi. The second plague (frogs) was also associated with the river ([8:3, 5, 9, 11](https://ref.ly/Exod8:3,Exod8:5,Exod8:9,Exod8:11)), for the swarms of frogs came up out of the river and enveloped the land (cf. [Ps 78:45](https://ref.ly/Ps78:45)), discrediting the frog\-headed goddess Heket.

There are numerous references to the Nile in the books of prophecy. Isaiah often mentions the Nile, but not always in the same context. In [7:18](https://ref.ly/Isa7:18) Isaiah writes that Israel would be invaded and humiliated by armies from the Nile. In the “oracle concerning Egypt” ([Is 19](https://ref.ly/Isa19:1-Isa19:25)), the prophet foresees both evil and good for the land of the Nile. The natural vegetation and sown crops along the river will be destroyed, while the fishermen will lament. These dire prospects are offset by the prediction of final blessing for Egypt.

In the burden of Tyre ([Is 23](https://ref.ly/Isa23:1-Isa23:18)) the revenue of the Sidonian merchants was “the harvest of the Nile” (v [3](https://ref.ly/Isa23:3)), indicating the importance of agricultural produce in the Nile valley. In verse [10](https://ref.ly/Isa23:10), Tyre casts off all restraint and is told to overflow the land like the Nile, for the Lord is bringing the pride of Tyre to an end. Jeremiah also predicted a severe defeat for Egypt and speaks of Egypt rising like the Nile, like rivers whose waters surge ([Jer 46:7–8](https://ref.ly/Jer46:7-Jer46:8)).

The prophecy of Ezekiel concerning Egypt ([Ez 29](https://ref.ly/Ezek29:1-Ezek29:21)) singles out Pharaoh, king of Egypt, and describes him in figures of speech drawn from the Nile. He is described as the great dragon that lies in the midst of his streams—a reference to the mighty crocodile. Pharaoh boasts, “My Nile is my own,” but the Lord said that he would put hooks into the king’s jaws and draw him out of the water of his streams with all of the fish sticking to his scales. The king and the fish of the streams will perish in the wilderness. Because of the proud boasts of the king, the Lord declares that he is against him and his streams and that Egypt will become a desolation and a waste.

Amos described the northern kingdom of Israel as being tossed about, and sinking again, like the Nile of Egypt ([Am 8:8](https://ref.ly/Amos8:8); [9:5](https://ref.ly/Amos9:5)). Finally, Zechariah spoke of an ingathering of Israel by the Lord and comments that in this process the Nile would be dried up ([Zec 10:11](https://ref.ly/Zech10:11)).

Although the prophetic references to the Nile primarily deal with severe judgments, the prophets looked forward to a time beyond judgment to eventual blessing for this land of the Nile.

*See also* Egypt, Egyptian.

* **Associated Passages:** EXO 1:22; EXO 2:5; EXO 7:15; EXO 8:3; EXO 8:5; EXO 8:9; EXO 8:11; EXO 8:20; EXO 17:5; PSA 78:44; PSA 78:45; ISA 7:18; ISA 23:3; ISA 23:10; AMO 8:8; AMO 9:5; ZEC 10:11; GEN 41:1–GEN 41:57; ISA 19:1–ISA 19:25; ISA 23:1–ISA 23:18; GEN 41:1–GEN 41:4; GEN 41:17–GEN 41:21; EXO 7:15–EXO 7:24; JER 46:7–JER 46:8; EZK 29:1–EZK 29:21
* **Associated Articles:** Egypt, Egyptian (ID: `4954@TyndaleBibleDictionary`)

