# Aquifer Open Bible Dictionary

**Tyndale Open Bible Dictionary: Aquifer Edition**

This work is an adaptation of *Tyndale Open Bible Dictionary* © 2023 Tyndale House Publishers, licensed under the CC BY\-SA 4\.0 license. The adaptation, *Aquifer Open Bible Dictionary*, was created by BiblioNexus and is also licensed under CC BY\-SA 4\.0\.

This resource has been adapted into multiple languages, including English, Tok Pisin, Arabic (عربي), French (Français), Hindi (हिंदी), Indonesian (Bahasa Indonesia), Portuguese (Português), Russian (Русский), Spanish (Español), Swahili (Kiswahili), and Simplified Chinese (简体中文).



--------------------------------

## Oreb (id: 7514)

OREB
====

One of two Midianite chieftains (the other being Zeeb) put to death by men from Ephraim’s tribe ([Jgs 7:25](https://ref.ly/Judg7:25)). The occasion for this execution was Gideon’s surprise attack on the Midianite encampment at the hill of Moreh in the valley of Jezreel. The Midianites’ line of retreat eastward required them to recross the Jordan River. Gideon sent word to the Ephraimites to seize the fording places on the river to prevent the Midianites from escaping. The Ephraimites, following the orders, intercepted a contingent of fleeing Midianites, including the prominent leaders Oreb and Zeeb. They beheaded these two leaders and sent their heads as a war prize to Gideon, who was then pursuing the Midianites on the east side of the Jordan ([8:3](https://ref.ly/Judg8:3)).

During Israel’s later history, the deaths of Oreb and Zeeb were recognized as a great triumph of God over the enemies of his people. The psalmist implores God to overthrow the nobles among Israel’s current enemies just as he did the Midianite chieftains ([Ps 83:11](https://ref.ly/Ps83:11)). The Lord, speaking through his prophet Isaiah, pledged that the Assyrians would be overthrown like the slaughter of Midian at the rock of Oreb ([Is 9:4](https://ref.ly/Isa9:4); [10:26](https://ref.ly/Isa10:26)), implying that the earlier victory amounted to more than the capture of two leaders; it was an important and strategic defeat of the Midianite invasion force.

* **Associated Passages:** JDG 7:25; JDG 8:3; PSA 83:11; ISA 9:4; ISA 10:26

