# Aquifer Open Bible Dictionary

**Tyndale Open Bible Dictionary: Aquifer Edition**

This work is an adaptation of *Tyndale Open Bible Dictionary* © 2023 Tyndale House Publishers, licensed under the CC BY\-SA 4\.0 license. The adaptation, *Aquifer Open Bible Dictionary*, was created by BiblioNexus and is also licensed under CC BY\-SA 4\.0\.

This resource has been adapted into multiple languages, including English, Tok Pisin, Arabic (عربي), French (Français), Hindi (हिंदी), Indonesian (Bahasa Indonesia), Portuguese (Português), Russian (Русский), Spanish (Español), Swahili (Kiswahili), and Simplified Chinese (简体中文).



--------------------------------

## Paran (id: 7580)

PARAN
=====

Desert region in the northeast Sinai Peninsula west of the Arabah (Rift Valley). The settlement of Kadesh\-barnea is its northernmost limit. Some scholars identify the great Et\-Tih plateau of the central Sinai as a part of this wilderness.

The wilderness of Paran is a wild, arid expanse of tableland, mountains, gorges, and wadis. The lack of water and vegetation made it a most inhospitable place and a stark contrast to the land flowing with milk and honey that was promised to Israel.

This wilderness became the home of Ishmael ([Gn 21:20–21](https://ref.ly/Gen21:20-Gen21:21)). The nation of Israel camped there on the way from Egypt to Canaan ([Nm 10:12](https://ref.ly/Num10:12); [12:16](https://ref.ly/Num12:16)). From Kadesh\-barnea, at the northern edge of the wilderness, Moses sent spies to reconnoiter the Promised Land ([13:3, 26](https://ref.ly/Num13:3,Num13:26)). David is said to have led his band of men to this region after the death of Samuel so as to distance himself from King Saul ([1 Sm 25:1](https://ref.ly/1Sam25:1)).

*See also* Palestine; Sina, Sinai; Wilderness Wanderings.

* **Associated Passages:** NUM 10:12; NUM 12:16; NUM 13:3; NUM 13:26; 1SA 25:1; GEN 21:20–GEN 21:21
* **Associated Articles:** Palestine (ID: `7558@TyndaleBibleDictionary`); Sina, Sinai (ID: `8513@TyndaleBibleDictionary`); Wilderness Wanderings (ID: `9063@TyndaleBibleDictionary`)

