# Aquifer Open Bible Dictionary

**Tyndale Open Bible Dictionary: Aquifer Edition**

This work is an adaptation of *Tyndale Open Bible Dictionary* © 2023 Tyndale House Publishers, licensed under the CC BY\-SA 4\.0 license. The adaptation, *Aquifer Open Bible Dictionary*, was created by BiblioNexus and is also licensed under CC BY\-SA 4\.0\.

This resource has been adapted into multiple languages, including English, Tok Pisin, Arabic (عربي), French (Français), Hindi (हिंदी), Indonesian (Bahasa Indonesia), Portuguese (Português), Russian (Русский), Spanish (Español), Swahili (Kiswahili), and Simplified Chinese (简体中文).



--------------------------------

## Paphos (id: 7571)

PAPHOS
======

Paphos was a city in southwest Cyprus. It began as a Phoenician settlement called "Old Paphos." Later, a Greek settlement called "New Paphos" was built about 16\.1 kilometers (10 miles) away from the original city. New Paphos became the main government center when Cyprus became part of the Roman Empire in 22 BC.

The combined city was famous for its temple. The people first dedicated the temple to the Syrian goddess Astarte. According to the Roman historian Tacitus, people worshiped Astarte using ancient Phoenician ceremonies. These ceremonies included putting oil on a cone\-shaped stone (possibly a meteorite). The Greeks later identified Astarte with their goddess Aphrodite. They believed Aphrodite came out of the sea.

In Paphos, the apostle Paul faced his first strong opposition to the good news about Jesus. This opposition came from a man named Elymas. In response, Paul performed his first miracle that is recorded in the Bible. Paul made Elymas blind, but the blindness was only temporary, showing Paul's mercy ([Acts 13:11](https://ref.ly/Acts13:11)).

* **Associated Passages:** ACT 13:11

