# Aquifer Open Bible Dictionary

**Tyndale Open Bible Dictionary: Aquifer Edition**

This work is an adaptation of *Tyndale Open Bible Dictionary* © 2023 Tyndale House Publishers, licensed under the CC BY\-SA 4\.0 license. The adaptation, *Aquifer Open Bible Dictionary*, was created by BiblioNexus and is also licensed under CC BY\-SA 4\.0\.

This resource has been adapted into multiple languages, including English, Tok Pisin, Arabic (عربي), French (Français), Hindi (हिंदी), Indonesian (Bahasa Indonesia), Portuguese (Português), Russian (Русский), Spanish (Español), Swahili (Kiswahili), and Simplified Chinese (简体中文).



--------------------------------

## Pavement (id: 7617)

PAVEMENT
========

Term occurring ten times in the Bible, usually alluding to the stone floor of the temple(s). Particular interest focuses on the reference in [John 19:13](https://ref.ly/John19:13) to the pavement on which Jesus stood trial before Pilate. It was at the decisive moment of the Roman phase of the trial of Jesus when “Pilate had Jesus brought out, and seated himself on the chair of judgement at a place called the Pavement, in Hebrew Gabbatha” ([Jn 19:13](https://ref.ly/John19:13), njb). This verse has played an important role in determining the location of Jesus’ trial. Until recently scholars located this pavement where Pilate’s judgment seat was placed under the present street level in Jerusalem at the site of Herod’s fortress Antonia. This enormous stone pavement consists of large blocks of limestone, excavated in the 1930s by Père Vincent. Today, scholars disagree about whether this is the most historically plausible site for the pavement where Jesus was condemned.

* **Associated Passages:** JHN 19:13

