# Aquifer Open Bible Dictionary

**Tyndale Open Bible Dictionary: Aquifer Edition**

This work is an adaptation of *Tyndale Open Bible Dictionary* © 2023 Tyndale House Publishers, licensed under the CC BY\-SA 4\.0 license. The adaptation, *Aquifer Open Bible Dictionary*, was created by BiblioNexus and is also licensed under CC BY\-SA 4\.0\.

This resource has been adapted into multiple languages, including English, Tok Pisin, Arabic (عربي), French (Français), Hindi (हिंदी), Indonesian (Bahasa Indonesia), Portuguese (Português), Russian (Русский), Spanish (Español), Swahili (Kiswahili), and Simplified Chinese (简体中文).



--------------------------------

## Pentateuch (id: 7646)

PENTATEUCH
==========

A word formed by the Greek roots *pente* (which means “five”) and *teuchos* (which means “book”). The term is commonly used to refer to the first five books of the Old Testament: Genesis, Exodus, Leviticus, Numbers, and Deuteronomy. These five books were commonly grouped as a single book. This portion of God’s word is the foundation the rest of Scripture relies on. It is traditionally attributed to Moses ([Exodus 17:14](https://ref.ly/Exod17:14); [24:4](https://ref.ly/Exod24:4); [34:27](https://ref.ly/Exod34:27); [Numbers 33:1–2](https://ref.ly/Num33:1-Num33:2); [Deuteronomy 31:9, 22](https://ref.ly/Deut31:9)). The Pentateuch includes many important stories, including:

* the creation of the universe
* God's interactions with humans in the Garden of Eden
* the creation of a prosperous family for Abraham (the patriarchal stories)
* the formation of the nation Israel

Much of the Pentateuch is made up of laws that guide the religious and everyday life of the nation, where God is considered the king.

*See also* Deuteronomy, Book of; Exodus, Book of; Genesis, Book of; Leviticus, Book of; Numbers, Book of; Torah.

* **Associated Passages:** EXO 17:14; EXO 24:4; EXO 34:27; DEU 31:9; DEU 31:22; NUM 33:1–NUM 33:2
* **Associated Articles:** Deuteronomy, Book of (ID: `4824@TyndaleBibleDictionary`); Book of Exodus (ID: `5206@TyndaleBibleDictionary`); Genesis, Book of (ID: `5414@TyndaleBibleDictionary`); Leviticus, Book of (ID: `6733@TyndaleBibleDictionary`); Numbers, Book of (ID: `7433@TyndaleBibleDictionary`); Torah (ID: `8897@TyndaleBibleDictionary`)

