# Aquifer Open Bible Dictionary

**Tyndale Open Bible Dictionary: Aquifer Edition**

This work is an adaptation of *Tyndale Open Bible Dictionary* © 2023 Tyndale House Publishers, licensed under the CC BY\-SA 4\.0 license. The adaptation, *Aquifer Open Bible Dictionary*, was created by BiblioNexus and is also licensed under CC BY\-SA 4\.0\.

This resource has been adapted into multiple languages, including English, Tok Pisin, Arabic (عربي), French (Français), Hindi (हिंदी), Indonesian (Bahasa Indonesia), Portuguese (Português), Russian (Русский), Spanish (Español), Swahili (Kiswahili), and Simplified Chinese (简体中文).



--------------------------------

## Pekahiah (id: 7626)

PEKAHIAH
========

Son of Menahem, king of Israel. Pekahiah (whose name means “Yahweh has opened \[his eyes]”) was among the 20 kings who ruled Israel from Samaria following its decline consequent to the fracture of the Solomonic monarchy in the tenth century BC. The brief account in the Bible concerning him ([2 Kgs 15:22–26](https://ref.ly/2Kgs15:22-2Kgs15:26)) points to the godlessness of his life (v [24](https://ref.ly/2Kgs15:24)). His sin, like that of his father (Menahem), was linked to the false worship of Jeroboam, who built shrines at Dan and Bethel to rival worship in the temple at Jerusalem. Such religious activity threatened the true worship of God by attempting to fuse biblical concepts with the fertility cult of Baal, a movement sharply denounced by the Word of God ([1 Kgs 13:1–5](https://ref.ly/1Kgs13:1-1Kgs13:5)). Like many of Israel’s kings, Pekahiah ruled briefly, being assassinated in the second year of his reign. The chief instigator of the plot against him, a captain named Pekah, took 50 men of Gilead and killed the king, along with two aides, in the citadel of the royal palace at Samaria. His successor, Pekah, was regrettably as evil as Pekahiah and received the condemnation of Scripture typical of virtually all the Israelite kings: he “did what was evil in the Lord’s sight” ([2 Kgs 15:28](https://ref.ly/2Kgs15:28), nlt).

*See also* Pekah.

* **Associated Passages:** 2KI 15:24; 2KI 15:28; 1KI 13:1–1KI 13:5; 2KI 15:22–2KI 15:26
* **Associated Articles:** Pekah (ID: `7627@TyndaleBibleDictionary`)

