# Aquifer Open Bible Dictionary

**Tyndale Open Bible Dictionary: Aquifer Edition**

This work is an adaptation of *Tyndale Open Bible Dictionary* © 2023 Tyndale House Publishers, licensed under the CC BY\-SA 4\.0 license. The adaptation, *Aquifer Open Bible Dictionary*, was created by BiblioNexus and is also licensed under CC BY\-SA 4\.0\.

This resource has been adapted into multiple languages, including English, Tok Pisin, Arabic (عربي), French (Français), Hindi (हिंदी), Indonesian (Bahasa Indonesia), Portuguese (Português), Russian (Русский), Spanish (Español), Swahili (Kiswahili), and Simplified Chinese (简体中文).



--------------------------------

## Plane Tree (id: 7760)

PLANE TREE
==========

A large spreading tree that has a wide trunk and scaly bark. It is native to the region of Palestine. This tree belongs to a family with bell\-shaped fruit clusters. Usually, its outer bark flakes off in patches or strips. The references in [Genesis 30:37](https://ref.ly/Gen30:37) and [Ezekiel 31:8](https://ref.ly/Ezek31:8) are apparently not to the chestnut tree, which does not naturally grow in Palestine. These are references to the oriental plane tree, *Platanus orientalis*.

The plane tree is a massive tree that can grow 18\.3 meters (60 feet) or more in height. Its trunk is often very thick, sometimes reaching around 12\.2 meters (40 feet) in circumference. The outer bark peels off in sheets or scales, revealing a smooth whitish or yellowish inner bark underneath.

This tree is common throughout Lebanon, Syria, and the region of Palestine. It can grow even in high mountain regions. However, it is mainly found in plains and lowlands, growing alongside streams and lakes and in wet, marshy places.

* **Associated Passages:** GEN 30:37; EZK 31:8
* **Associated Articles:** Plants (ID: `7761@Unknown`)

