# Aquifer Open Bible Dictionary

**Tyndale Open Bible Dictionary: Aquifer Edition**

This work is an adaptation of *Tyndale Open Bible Dictionary* © 2023 Tyndale House Publishers, licensed under the CC BY\-SA 4\.0 license. The adaptation, *Aquifer Open Bible Dictionary*, was created by BiblioNexus and is also licensed under CC BY\-SA 4\.0\.

This resource has been adapted into multiple languages, including English, Tok Pisin, Arabic (عربي), French (Français), Hindi (हिंदी), Indonesian (Bahasa Indonesia), Portuguese (Português), Russian (Русский), Spanish (Español), Swahili (Kiswahili), and Simplified Chinese (简体中文).



--------------------------------

## Philippi (id: 7711)

PHILIPPI
========

Minor village of Thrace (known in the ancient world as “The Springs”) until about 357 BC, when the father of Alexander the Great, Philip II of Macedon, conquered the site and rebuilt it. He gave the village his name (“Philip’s City”), fortified it as a military stronghold in subduing the area, and exploited the nearby gold mines. Two hundred years later, in the Roman era, it became a main city of one of the four Roman districts into which Macedonia was divided. But because it was about 10 miles (16\.1 kilometers) inlandƒ from the port of Neapolis, its growth was limited. Nearby Amphipolis (southwest) was the center of Roman government.

Philippi gained worldwide fame in 42 BC as the site where the imperial armies of Antony and Octavian defeated the republican generals Brutus and Cassius (the assassins of Julius Caesar). The victory opened the way for the emergence of the Roman Empire under the rule of Octavian (Augustus).

Veterans from the war of 42 BC and other battles commonly settled in Philippi. When Paul came to the city, it still reflected its Latin military heritage. Situated on the Ignatian Way, it was one stop on that great military highway connecting the Adriatic with the Aegean. It possessed distinct civic pride since it was a Roman colony (enjoying numerous privileges, such as tax exemptions), promoted Latin as its official language, and hosted numerous Roman citizens. Its government was modeled on the municipal constitution of Rome (its leader bearing Roman titles throughout), and the people lived as if they were indeed located in Italy. As Luke records in [Acts 16:21](https://ref.ly/Acts16:21), the citizens viewed themselves as Romans.

Paul visited the city on his second missionary tour and years later wrote one letter to the church. The account of Acts gives detailed attention to Paul’s visit. The narrative regularly refers to the city’s Roman heritage: not only does Paul successfully employ his Roman citizenship in his defense ([Acts 16:37](https://ref.ly/Acts16:37)), but the city magistrates bear the dignified Latin title *praetor* (given in its Greek translation, *strategos*—verses [20–22, 38](https://ref.ly/Acts16:20-Acts16:22,Acts16:38)—and which English Bibles translate “magistrate”). There appears to have been a small Jewish community here. The church began with believing Jewish women who met outside the city because there was no synagogue. Later, they convened in the home of an important woman convert named Lydia (verses [14–15, 40](https://ref.ly/Acts16:14-Acts16:15,Acts16:40)).

Some have suggested that Luke may have had a special interest in Philippi, demonstrated by his careful attention to the city and by the “we” sections of the book of Acts. The first “we” section (when Luke joins Paul) begins and ends at Philippi ([Acts 16:10, 40](https://ref.ly/Acts16:10,Acts16:40)). This suggests that Luke stayed behind in the city after Paul’s departure. Then on the third tour Luke joins Paul again when the apostle passes through Philippi ([20:6](https://ref.ly/Acts20:6)).

* **Associated Passages:** ACT 16:10; ACT 16:21; ACT 16:37; ACT 16:38; ACT 16:40; ACT 20:6; ACT 16:20–ACT 16:22; ACT 16:14–ACT 16:15

