# Aquifer Open Bible Dictionary

**Tyndale Open Bible Dictionary: Aquifer Edition**

This work is an adaptation of *Tyndale Open Bible Dictionary* © 2023 Tyndale House Publishers, licensed under the CC BY\-SA 4\.0 license. The adaptation, *Aquifer Open Bible Dictionary*, was created by BiblioNexus and is also licensed under CC BY\-SA 4\.0\.

This resource has been adapted into multiple languages, including English, Tok Pisin, Arabic (عربي), French (Français), Hindi (हिंदी), Indonesian (Bahasa Indonesia), Portuguese (Português), Russian (Русский), Spanish (Español), Swahili (Kiswahili), and Simplified Chinese (简体中文).



--------------------------------

## Petra (id: 7684)

PETRA
=====

The capital of the Nabateans, who first appeared in history in 312 BC. The Nabateans were of Arabic origin, though their ancestry is uncertain. They occupied the old land of Edom and made Petra their capital. Petra lay in an impressive valley about 1,000 yards (914\.4 meters) wide among the mountains of western Edom. It was approximately 60 miles (96\.5 kilometers) north of Aqaba. The only access to the valley is through a narrow gorge called the Siq. On all sides, massive cliffs of reddish sandstone arise. 

Today, ruins remain of many temples, houses, tombs, and other structures hewn out of reddish sandstone. A Roman basilica (used for meetings and business) and theater (where people watched plays and other performances) are still visible. The place was occupied during Roman times. It later had a Christian church and a bishop. Petra was abandoned and its buildings started to fall apart during the days of the Muslim conquest in the seventh century AD.

*See also* Nabataeans, Nabateans.

* **Associated Articles:** Nabataeans, Nabateans (ID: `7272@TyndaleBibleDictionary`)

