# Aquifer Open Bible Dictionary

**Tyndale Open Bible Dictionary: Aquifer Edition**

This work is an adaptation of *Tyndale Open Bible Dictionary* © 2023 Tyndale House Publishers, licensed under the CC BY\-SA 4\.0 license. The adaptation, *Aquifer Open Bible Dictionary*, was created by BiblioNexus and is also licensed under CC BY\-SA 4\.0\.

This resource has been adapted into multiple languages, including English, Tok Pisin, Arabic (عربي), French (Français), Hindi (हिंदी), Indonesian (Bahasa Indonesia), Portuguese (Português), Russian (Русский), Spanish (Español), Swahili (Kiswahili), and Simplified Chinese (简体中文).



--------------------------------

## Pi-Beseth (id: 7730)

PI\-BESETH\*
============

City mentioned together with Thebes, Memphis, and On in Ezekiel’s oracle about Egypt’s fall ([Ez 30:17](https://ref.ly/Ezek30:17), nlt mg). In Egyptian the name is translated “house of the goddess Bastet.” Bastet was first represented as a woman with the head of a lioness, and in later periods by the head of a cat. In Greek she was known as Boubastis or Bubastis. The city of Boubastis was extensively described by Herodotus. It was located on the right shore of the Old Tanite branch of the Nile, also known as the Branch of Boubastis. Boubastis is the present Tell Basta. Archaeological excavations in 1866–67 unearthed evidence that it is a very old city, dating from the Old Kingdom. It was not until Shishak I, the founder of the 22d (Libyan) dynasty, that Pi\-beseth became the capital. Hence, the dynasty is also known as the dynasty of Boubastis. The 23d dynasty kept Boubastis as the capital. It served about two centuries as the capital (c. 950–750 BC). The city was destroyed around 350 BC by Persian forces.

* **Associated Passages:** EZK 30:17

