# Aquifer Open Bible Dictionary

**Tyndale Open Bible Dictionary: Aquifer Edition**

This work is an adaptation of *Tyndale Open Bible Dictionary* © 2023 Tyndale House Publishers, licensed under the CC BY\-SA 4\.0 license. The adaptation, *Aquifer Open Bible Dictionary*, was created by BiblioNexus and is also licensed under CC BY\-SA 4\.0\.

This resource has been adapted into multiple languages, including English, Tok Pisin, Arabic (عربي), French (Français), Hindi (हिंदी), Indonesian (Bahasa Indonesia), Portuguese (Português), Russian (Русский), Spanish (Español), Swahili (Kiswahili), and Simplified Chinese (简体中文).



--------------------------------

## Philadelphia (id: 7706)

PHILADELPHIA
============

1\. City of the Decapolis, not specifically mentioned in any NT writing. It was located on the plateau about 25 miles (40\.2 kilometers) east of the Jordan River. In 63 BC Palestine came under Roman domination. Pompey, the Roman general who conquered the region, reorganized the territory. He established a league of 10 self\-governing cities or city\-states. Most of these were located on the eastern side of the Jordan River. Philadelphia was the southernmost, and Damascus the northernmost, of the 10\. In the Gospels this territory is referred to as the Decapolis.

*See also* Decapolis.

2\. City in western Asia Minor. It was one of the seven Asian cities to which the author of the book of Revelation addressed letters, mentioned in [1:11](https://ref.ly/Rev1:11) and [3:7–13](https://ref.ly/Rev3:7-Rev3:13).

This city was founded about 140 BC by Attalus II of the city of Pergamum. Attalus II was also known as “Philadelphus”; the name of the city was derived from this royal nickname. He intended that it would serve as a center for the spread of Greek culture throughout the region, especially to the people of Phrygia. Situated on a fertile plain, it was rich with vineyards and wine production. Asian Philadelphia was heavily damaged by an earthquake in the year AD 17\. For the purpose of rebuilding, it was granted disaster aid by the Roman emperor Tiberius.

When John wrote from Patmos near the end of the first century, the churches of western Asia were undergoing persecution. The church in Philadelphia was one of them. This church was enduring the persecution faithfully, and the letter to it ([Rv 3:7–13](https://ref.ly/Rev3:7-Rev3:13)) contains no words of reproach or warning. Instead, Jesus gave them encouragement and precious promises.

Some years later, the Christian bishop and martyr Ignatius of Antioch also wrote a letter to the church in Philadelphia. He expressed appreciation for his recent visit with them, and encouraged them in Christian unity.

* **Associated Passages:** REV 1:11; REV 3:7–REV 3:13
* **Associated Articles:** Decapolis (ID: `4790@TyndaleBibleDictionary`)

