# Aquifer Open Bible Dictionary

**Tyndale Open Bible Dictionary: Aquifer Edition**

This work is an adaptation of *Tyndale Open Bible Dictionary* © 2023 Tyndale House Publishers, licensed under the CC BY\-SA 4\.0 license. The adaptation, *Aquifer Open Bible Dictionary*, was created by BiblioNexus and is also licensed under CC BY\-SA 4\.0\.

This resource has been adapted into multiple languages, including English, Tok Pisin, Arabic (عربي), French (Français), Hindi (हिंदी), Indonesian (Bahasa Indonesia), Portuguese (Português), Russian (Русский), Spanish (Español), Swahili (Kiswahili), and Simplified Chinese (简体中文).



--------------------------------

## Psalm 151 (id: 7840)

PSALM 151
=========

A psalm that is accepted as Scripture by the Eastern Orthodox churches but not by Jews, Roman Catholics, or Protestants. Psalm 151 was known only through ancient translations (Greek, Latin, and Syriac) until it was found in a manuscript at Qumran. At Qumran, the psalm was included in the Hebrew Psalm Scroll (11Q). The Hebrew text includes two different poems. The first poem (called 151A) is a commentary on [1 Samuel 16:1–13](https://ref.ly/1Sam16:1-1Sam16:13). It relates how David watched his father’s flocks but was made king over God’s people because of his heart. The second poem (called 151B) is a commentary on [1 Samuel 17](https://ref.ly/1Sam17:1-1Sam17:58) and discusses David and Goliath. Some think it shows the bravery of David rather than his humility as in 151A.

* **Associated Passages:** 1SA 17:1–1SA 17:58; 1SA 16:1–1SA 16:13

