# Aquifer Open Bible Dictionary

**Tyndale Open Bible Dictionary: Aquifer Edition**

This work is an adaptation of *Tyndale Open Bible Dictionary* © 2023 Tyndale House Publishers, licensed under the CC BY\-SA 4\.0 license. The adaptation, *Aquifer Open Bible Dictionary*, was created by BiblioNexus and is also licensed under CC BY\-SA 4\.0\.

This resource has been adapted into multiple languages, including English, Tok Pisin, Arabic (عربي), French (Français), Hindi (हिंदी), Indonesian (Bahasa Indonesia), Portuguese (Português), Russian (Русский), Spanish (Español), Swahili (Kiswahili), and Simplified Chinese (简体中文).



--------------------------------

## Poplar (id: 7778)

POPLAR
======

The poplar is a fast\-growing tree that loses its leaves seasonally. It belongs to the same plant family as the aspen and cottonwood. The references in [2 Samuel 5:23–24](https://ref.ly/2Sam5:23-2Sam5:24) and [1 Chronicles 14:14–15](https://ref.ly/1Chr14:14-1Chr14:15) to balsam trees are more likely referring to the Euphrates poplar or aspen, *Populus euphratica*. This tree grows to a height of 9\.1 to 13\.7 meters (30 to 45 feet) with spreading branches. The Euphrates aspen is found only along rivers and stream banks throughout the area from Syria through the region of Palestine to Stony Arabia. It is especially common in the Jordan Valley.

The white poplar *(Populus alba)* is common in wet places in Syria, Lebanon, the region of Palestine, and Sinai. It grows to a height of 9\.1 to 18\.3 meters (30 to 60 feet) with spreading branches. Some scholars suggest that the altars of various pagan religions were usually built on the top of a hill and in the shade of a poplar grove.

* **Associated Articles:** Plants (ID: `7761@Unknown`)

