# Aquifer Open Bible Dictionary

**Tyndale Open Bible Dictionary: Aquifer Edition**

This work is an adaptation of *Tyndale Open Bible Dictionary* © 2023 Tyndale House Publishers, licensed under the CC BY\-SA 4\.0 license. The adaptation, *Aquifer Open Bible Dictionary*, was created by BiblioNexus and is also licensed under CC BY\-SA 4\.0\.

This resource has been adapted into multiple languages, including English, Tok Pisin, Arabic (عربي), French (Français), Hindi (हिंदी), Indonesian (Bahasa Indonesia), Portuguese (Português), Russian (Русский), Spanish (Español), Swahili (Kiswahili), and Simplified Chinese (简体中文).



--------------------------------

## Proconsul (id: 7827)

PROCONSUL
=========

A proconsul was a governor chosen by the senate of Rome to rule a province. Starting from the time of Emperor Augustus, the Roman senate chose governors to manage certain Roman senatorial provinces. These were provinces considered safe enough that they did not need an army stationed there.

Proconsuls served for one year. They served between the time when they were a *praetor* (a lower government official) and when they became a consul of Rome (a higher position). Proconsuls were different from procurators, who were chosen by the emperor to rule imperial provinces for no set time period. 

We meet two proconsuls in the book of Acts: 

* Sergius Paulus of Cyprus ([Acts 13:7–12](https://ref.ly/Acts13:7-Acts13:12)), and
* Gallio of Achaia ([18:12–17](https://ref.ly/Acts18:12-Acts18:17)).

*See also* Gallio; Gallio Inscription; Sergius Paulus.

* **Associated Passages:** ACT 18:12–ACT 18:17; ACT 13:7–ACT 13:12
* **Associated Articles:** Gallio Inscription (ID: `5356@TyndaleBibleDictionary`); Gallio (ID: `5357@TyndaleBibleDictionary`); Sergius Paulus (ID: `8237@TyndaleBibleDictionary`)

