# Aquifer Open Bible Dictionary

**Tyndale Open Bible Dictionary: Aquifer Edition**

This work is an adaptation of *Tyndale Open Bible Dictionary* © 2023 Tyndale House Publishers, licensed under the CC BY\-SA 4\.0 license. The adaptation, *Aquifer Open Bible Dictionary*, was created by BiblioNexus and is also licensed under CC BY\-SA 4\.0\.

This resource has been adapted into multiple languages, including English, Tok Pisin, Arabic (عربي), French (Français), Hindi (हिंदी), Indonesian (Bahasa Indonesia), Portuguese (Português), Russian (Русский), Spanish (Español), Swahili (Kiswahili), and Simplified Chinese (简体中文).



--------------------------------

## Pul (id: 7855)

PUL
===

1. A name given to Tiglath\-pileser, the Assyrian ruler from 745 to 727 BC, when he became King of Babylon in 729 BC. He ruled Babylon until 727 BC. ([2 Kings 15:19](https://ref.ly/2Kgs15:19); [1 Chronicles 5:26](https://ref.ly/1Chr5:26)). The meaning of the name is unknown, and Assyrian manuscripts do not mention it. Some scholars suggest that Pul was the original name of Tiglath\-pileser.

    *See* Tiglath\-pileser.

2. An African people mentioned only in the King James Version of [Isaiah 66:19](https://ref.ly/Isa66:19). Their connection with Tarshish and Lud gives strong support that “Pul” is a copyist error for “Put” (as in various Greek manuscripts). They were a people related to the Egyptians and could be a subculture of Libyans.

    *See* Put (Place).

* **Associated Passages:** 2KI 15:19; 1CH 5:26; ISA 66:19
* **Associated Articles:** Put (Place) (ID: `7871@TyndaleBibleDictionary`); Tiglath-Pileser (ID: `8837@TyndaleBibleDictionary`)

