# Aquifer Open Bible Dictionary

**Tyndale Open Bible Dictionary: Aquifer Edition**

This work is an adaptation of *Tyndale Open Bible Dictionary* © 2023 Tyndale House Publishers, licensed under the CC BY\-SA 4\.0 license. The adaptation, *Aquifer Open Bible Dictionary*, was created by BiblioNexus and is also licensed under CC BY\-SA 4\.0\.

This resource has been adapted into multiple languages, including English, Tok Pisin, Arabic (عربي), French (Français), Hindi (हिंदी), Indonesian (Bahasa Indonesia), Portuguese (Português), Russian (Русский), Spanish (Español), Swahili (Kiswahili), and Simplified Chinese (简体中文).



--------------------------------

## Providence (id: 7839)

PROVIDENCE
==========

The way God helps human beings throughout history, especially those who believe in him.

Significance of Providence
--------------------------

Throughout history, many people have found comfort in God’s care. God does not leave Earth alone in the universe or forget about humans for a moment. God visits, communicates, controls, and intervenes in our lives and meets our needs. Providence is a reason to be thankful.

False Ideas about Providence
----------------------------

There are many false ideas about providence, showing that it is an important issue. Errors arise in ideas about providence that are not based on teachings from the Bible when people deny God's personhood. All that is left is an unfriendly force that dominates us and controls everything. There are many contradictions in these false ideas, including:

1. **Fate**: Some people think life is controlled by a fate that cannot be predicted, saying things like “As fate would have it."
2. **Luck**: Others speak about “fortune” or “luck.” But since luck is not a person, fortune\-tellers attempt to understand it, and some create concepts such as “lady luck” (the idea of luck as a magical woman who controls events).
3. **Serendipity**: Taking credit for accidentally discovering good things. This ignores God's role and does not give thanks.
4. **History**: Some groups have believed that history supports their ideas. For example:

    * Supporters of Marxism (followers of Karl Marx's ideas) have said, "History is on our side." They believed that future events would inevitably lead to a world ruled by Communism.
        * Some American leaders believed in "manifest destiny." This idea claimed that the United States was meant to become the most powerful country in its region or even the world.
5. **Progress**: Advances in science, technology, education, and society lead some to believe in progress as a great force. In a way, this views providence as progress but takes the glory from God.
6. **Nature**: Certain figures, like Ralph Waldo Emerson and Henry David Thoreau, attributed providence to nature. But nature is uncaring.
7. **Natural Selection**: Charles Darwin’s classic on biological evolution, *The Origin of the Species,* popularized natural selection. For many, the force behind “natural selection” became more important than God’s providence. The idea that “the fit survive” makes providence unnecessary.

These views cannot all be true. They also don't satisfy people who look for a providence that meets their unique needs. Only the Christian doctrine of providence provides that.

Biblical Meaning of Providence
------------------------------

Providence is the help God gives for people's needs. 

Abraham’s test of faith is a classic example. God told him to sacrifice his son—a gift he could not afford. Abraham struggled with this decision, not wanting to lose either his son or God’s friendship. When Isaac asked about the sacrifice, Abraham responded, “God Himself will provide the lamb for the burnt offering, my son” ([Genesis 22:8](https://ref.ly/Gen22:8)). God did provide a suitable sacrifice, “a ram in a thicket, caught by its horns” ([Genesis 22:13](https://ref.ly/Gen22:13)).

The word “providence” means “to see before,” and to do something about the situation. To Abraham, it was clear that God placed the ram at the place of sacrifice for his use. “Provision” and “providence” are related to the word, “provide." However, providence has come to mean God's provision.

In the New Testament, Paul praised the Philippians’ support of his missionary work. He was confident that God's providence would support them: “And my God will supply all your needs according to His glorious riches in Christ Jesus” ([Philippians 4:19](https://ref.ly/Phil4:19)). Jesus' sacrifice confirms God's providence. God asked for Abraham's son but did not accept the sacrifice. Two thousand years later, he gave his own son as a sacrifice. It is God’s nature to foresee human needs and to provide for them.

Providence and the Nature of God
--------------------------------

Following his words to the Philippians (“his riches in glory”—[Philippians 4:19](https://ref.ly/Phil4:19)), Paul wrote a doxology to “our God and Father” (verse[20](https://ref.ly/Phil4:20)). Providence is like a father providing and guiding. God is our Father, and his providence is how that is expressed. Fathers give their children opportunities without taking away their freedom. They lead their children through caring for them. Providence flows naturally from God’s fatherly nature.

*See also* Foreordination; God, Being and Attributes of.

* **Associated Passages:** GEN 22:8; GEN 22:13; PHP 4:19; PHP 4:20
* **Associated Articles:** Foreordination (ID: `5291@TyndaleBibleDictionary`); God, Being and Attributes of (ID: `5497@TyndaleBibleDictionary`)

