# Aquifer Open Bible Dictionary

**Tyndale Open Bible Dictionary: Aquifer Edition**

This work is an adaptation of *Tyndale Open Bible Dictionary* © 2023 Tyndale House Publishers, licensed under the CC BY\-SA 4\.0 license. The adaptation, *Aquifer Open Bible Dictionary*, was created by BiblioNexus and is also licensed under CC BY\-SA 4\.0\.

This resource has been adapted into multiple languages, including English, Tok Pisin, Arabic (عربي), French (Français), Hindi (हिंदी), Indonesian (Bahasa Indonesia), Portuguese (Português), Russian (Русский), Spanish (Español), Swahili (Kiswahili), and Simplified Chinese (简体中文).



--------------------------------

## Procurator (id: 7828)

PROCURATOR
==========

A procurator was a financial officer of Rome. Many modern translations use the term "governor." was usually from the equestrian rank (upper middle class of Roman society). The procurator's job included overseeing and collecting imperial taxes in an assigned province. In Judea and other smaller provinces of the Roman Empire, the procurator sometimes acted as the governor of that region.

A procurator not only managed finances but also had judicial and military authority. His main responsibility was keeping peace in his jurisdiction. The New Testament mentions three Roman procurators:

* Pontius Pilate was procurator from AD 26–36 (see [Matthew 27](https://ref.ly/Matt27:1-Matt27:66); [John 18–19](https://ref.ly/John18:1-John19:42)).
* Antonius Felix was procurator from AD 52–59 (see [Acts 23:24–25:14](https://ref.ly/Acts23:24-Acts25:14)).
* Porcius Festus was procurator from AD 59–62 (see [Acts 24:27–26:32](https://ref.ly/Acts24:27-Acts26:32)) .

These administrators were accountable and subordinate to the governor of Syria.

*See also* Felix, Antonius; Festus, Porcius; Pilate, Pontius.

* **Associated Passages:** JHN 18:1–JHN 19:42; ACT 23:24–ACT 25:14; ACT 24:27–ACT 26:32
* **Associated Articles:** Felix, Antonius (ID: `5249@TyndaleBibleDictionary`); Festus, Porcius (ID: `5254@TyndaleBibleDictionary`); Pilate, Pontius (ID: `7734@TyndaleBibleDictionary`)

