# Aquifer Open Bible Dictionary

**Tyndale Open Bible Dictionary: Aquifer Edition**

This work is an adaptation of *Tyndale Open Bible Dictionary* © 2023 Tyndale House Publishers, licensed under the CC BY\-SA 4\.0 license. The adaptation, *Aquifer Open Bible Dictionary*, was created by BiblioNexus and is also licensed under CC BY\-SA 4\.0\.

This resource has been adapted into multiple languages, including English, Tok Pisin, Arabic (عربي), French (Français), Hindi (हिंदी), Indonesian (Bahasa Indonesia), Portuguese (Português), Russian (Русский), Spanish (Español), Swahili (Kiswahili), and Simplified Chinese (简体中文).



--------------------------------

## Presbyter (id: 7810)

PRESBYTER
=========

A New Testament term referring to an elder in the church. In the Old Testament, synagogues were governed by a council of elders. Following this pattern, the church of the New Testament had officers (*presbuteroi,* “older persons”). The task of officers was to tend the flock of God (like a shepherd tends a flock of sheep) that was under their care ([1 Peter 5:2](https://ref.ly/1Pet5:2)). Thus, elders had the following responsibilities:

* Elders were called to labor in preaching and teaching ([1 Timothy 5:17](https://ref.ly/1Tim5:17)).
* Elders were called to visit, pray over, and anoint the sick ([James 5:14](https://ref.ly/Jas5:14)).
* Elders were called to administer famine relief ([Acts 11:29–30](https://ref.ly/Acts11:29-Acts11:30)).
* Elders were called to generally oversee the affairs of the church ([Acts 15:4](https://ref.ly/Acts15:4); [16:4](https://ref.ly/Acts16:4)).

Evidence suggests that all elders were of equal status. The terms “presbyter” and “bishop” were at first used interchangeably ([Acts 20:17, 28](https://ref.ly/Acts20:17,Acts20:28); [Philippians 1:1](https://ref.ly/Phil1:1); [Titus 1:5–7](https://ref.ly/Titus1:5-Titus1:7)). However, in the second century, the presiding presbyter gradually emerged as a distinctive figure. The presbyter had the highest\-ranking position and was the source of authority. As the years passed, the title “presbyter” was shortened to that of “priest.” In churches of the episcopal order (those governed by bishops), it remains so today. 

Nevertheless, it is significant that the New Testament never links priestly functions with the office of presbyter. With the spread and development of Christianity, the priest became a powerful figure. Unbiblical additions developed alongside doctrines concerning the Lord's Supper. These additions were exposed and rejected when the Reformers triumphed in the 16th century and stressed the priesthood of all believers. This teaching declares that all believers have access to God through Christ without needing a priest to mediate for them. The Reformers were leaders of the Protestant Reformation, a religious movement to reform (or change) the Catholic church. In Protestantism, priests became ministers, pastors, or (in more modern times) clergymen. In non\-Roman Episcopal churches, “priest” is used again today. Even where it is interpreted differently from Roman usage, most evangelical Anglicans refuse to use it. In Presbyterian and similar churches, the elders (whether teaching or ruling) are still officially called presbyters, and all are of equal status.

*See also* Bishop; Deacon, Deaconess; Elder; Pastor; Spiritual Gifts.

* **Associated Passages:** ACT 15:4; ACT 16:4; ACT 20:17; ACT 20:28; PHP 1:1; 1TI 5:17; JAS 5:14; 1PE 5:2; ACT 11:29–ACT 11:30; TIT 1:5–TIT 1:7
* **Associated Articles:** Bishop (ID: `4256@TyndaleBibleDictionary`); Deacon, Deaconess (ID: `4776@TyndaleBibleDictionary`); Elder (ID: `4975@TyndaleBibleDictionary`); Pastor (ID: `7603@TyndaleBibleDictionary`); Spiritual Gifts (ID: `8608@TyndaleBibleDictionary`)

