# Aquifer Open Bible Dictionary

**Tyndale Open Bible Dictionary: Aquifer Edition**

This work is an adaptation of *Tyndale Open Bible Dictionary* © 2023 Tyndale House Publishers, licensed under the CC BY\-SA 4\.0 license. The adaptation, *Aquifer Open Bible Dictionary*, was created by BiblioNexus and is also licensed under CC BY\-SA 4\.0\.

This resource has been adapted into multiple languages, including English, Tok Pisin, Arabic (عربي), French (Français), Hindi (हिंदी), Indonesian (Bahasa Indonesia), Portuguese (Português), Russian (Русский), Spanish (Español), Swahili (Kiswahili), and Simplified Chinese (简体中文).



--------------------------------

## Preparation, Day of (id: 7809)

PREPARATION, Day of
===================

The Day of Preparation is the name given in Scripture for the day before the Sabbath. Each of the Gospels refers to a day that it calls "the Preparation" ([Matthew 27:62](https://ref.ly/Matt27:62); [Mark 15:42](https://ref.ly/Mark15:42); [Luke 23:54](https://ref.ly/Luke23:54); [John 19:14, 31, 42](https://ref.ly/John19:14,John19:31,John19:42)). Mark calls it "the day before the Sabbath." The Jews did not have specific names for the days of the week. Instead, they referred to "the first \[second, etc.] day of the week." But the Sabbath was distinctive, and the previous day was used to prepare for this weekly day of rest and worship. Thus, what we call "Friday" the Jews called "Preparation." What was "prepared" is not said. But as no work could be done on the Sabbath, preparations had to be made for food and other necessities.

"The Preparation of the Passover" ([John 19:14](https://ref.ly/John19:14)) is often understood to mean "Passover eve," the day before Passover. This understanding comes from the common use of "the Preparation" for the day before the Sabbath. Outside historical examples of people calling the day before the Passover "the Preparation" do not exist.

* **Associated Passages:** MAT 27:62; MRK 15:42; LUK 23:54; JHN 19:14; JHN 19:31; JHN 19:42

