# Aquifer Open Bible Dictionary

**Tyndale Open Bible Dictionary: Aquifer Edition**

This work is an adaptation of *Tyndale Open Bible Dictionary* © 2023 Tyndale House Publishers, licensed under the CC BY\-SA 4\.0 license. The adaptation, *Aquifer Open Bible Dictionary*, was created by BiblioNexus and is also licensed under CC BY\-SA 4\.0\.

This resource has been adapted into multiple languages, including English, Tok Pisin, Arabic (عربي), French (Français), Hindi (हिंदी), Indonesian (Bahasa Indonesia), Portuguese (Português), Russian (Русский), Spanish (Español), Swahili (Kiswahili), and Simplified Chinese (简体中文).



--------------------------------

## Rahab (Person) (id: 7910)

RAHAB (Person)
==============

The heroine of the battle of Jericho ([Joshua 2–6](https://ref.ly/Josh2:1-Josh6:27)). Soon after Moses' death, God told Joshua to cross the Jordan and occupy the promised land. Before the crossing, Joshua sent two spies to scout the land. He wanted to check the fortified city of Jericho. Upon entering the city, the spies found their way quickly to Rahab’s house, which was perhaps an inn and/or a brothel. She apparently was a prostitute.

The king of Jericho soon learned of the spies' arrival. He naturally demanded that Rahab reveal their whereabouts. She cleverly admitted seeing them but insisted that they had left the city at nightfall. Actually, the spies were hiding under the stalks of flax on the roof of her house. When the king's search party left Jericho to hunt the spies, Rahab confessed to the spies why she helped the Israelites. She feared the God of the Jews, believing that he would surely give them victory ([Joshua 2:11](https://ref.ly/Josh2:11)).

For her help, the spies agreed to save Rahab and her family. The sign was to be a cord of scarlet thread hanging from her window, the same avenue the spies used to escape the city. Rahab and her family were indeed the only survivors of the later battle. They were led to safety, on Joshua’s command, by the very men Rahab had saved.

Rahab became the wife of Salmon and mother of Boaz. Thus, she was an ancestor of Jesus ([Matthew 1:5](https://ref.ly/Matt1:5)). Rahab is listed, along with Moses, David, Samson, and Samuel, as an example of faith ([Hebrews 11:31](https://ref.ly/Heb11:31)). Her deed is an example of good works and justification ([James 2:25](https://ref.ly/Jas2:25)).

*See also* Conquest and Allotment of the Land; Joshua, Book of.

* **Associated Passages:** JOS 2:11; MAT 1:5; HEB 11:31; JAS 2:25; JOS 2:1–JOS 6:27
* **Associated Articles:** Conquest and Allotment of the Land (ID: `4635@TyndaleBibleDictionary`); Joshua, Book of (ID: `6458@TyndaleBibleDictionary`)

