# Aquifer Open Bible Dictionary

**Tyndale Open Bible Dictionary: Aquifer Edition**

This work is an adaptation of *Tyndale Open Bible Dictionary* © 2023 Tyndale House Publishers, licensed under the CC BY\-SA 4\.0 license. The adaptation, *Aquifer Open Bible Dictionary*, was created by BiblioNexus and is also licensed under CC BY\-SA 4\.0\.

This resource has been adapted into multiple languages, including English, Tok Pisin, Arabic (عربي), French (Français), Hindi (हिंदी), Indonesian (Bahasa Indonesia), Portuguese (Português), Russian (Русский), Spanish (Español), Swahili (Kiswahili), and Simplified Chinese (简体中文).



--------------------------------

## Quirinius (id: 7886)

QUIRINIUS
=========

Roman governor of Syria at the time of Jesus’ birth ([Luke 2:2](https://ref.ly/Luke2:2)). According to the Roman historian Tacitus (*Annals* 3\.48\), Publius Sulpicius Quirinius was elected consul of Syria in 12 BC. He was appointed around 7 BC, along with Varus, legatus (or governor) of Syria. His duties were in military and foreign affairs. Varus handled civil matters. Quirinius's first term as governor lasted several years. He led a successful expedition against the Homonadenses. They were a rebellious group of mountaineers in Asia Minor's Cilician province. He also oversaw an empire\-wide census ordered by Caesar Augustus. Luke records that Jesus’s birth took place at the time of this first enrollment “while Quirinius was governor of Syria” ([Luke 2:2](https://ref.ly/Luke2:2)). Matthew says it was during the reign of King Herod the Great ([Matthew 2:1](https://ref.ly/Matt2:1)), presumably in 4 BC.

Quirinius became rector to Gaius Caesar in 1 BC. He married Aemilia Ledipa in AD 2, but later divorced her. In AD 6, he was reappointed legatus of Syria, perhaps serving in this position for a couple of years. In this second administration Quirinius again supervised a census of Judea. The second census was not done according to Jewish custom, as was the first. The second census taxed the Jews as a subservient people to Rome. This caused Jewish opposition and rebellion against Rome. This is probably the census referred to by the Jewish historian Josephus (*Antiquities* 17\.13\.5\) and Gamaliel ([Acts 5:37](https://ref.ly/Acts5:37)). 

The remainder of Quirinius’s career was probably spent in Rome, where he died at an advanced age in AD 21\.

*See also* Census; Chronology of the Bible (New Testament).

* **Associated Passages:** MAT 2:1; LUK 2:2; ACT 5:37
* **Associated Articles:** Census (ID: `4457@TyndaleBibleDictionary`); Chronology of the Bible (New Testament) (ID: `4551@TyndaleBibleDictionary`)

