# Aquifer Open Bible Dictionary

**Tyndale Open Bible Dictionary: Aquifer Edition**

This work is an adaptation of *Tyndale Open Bible Dictionary* © 2023 Tyndale House Publishers, licensed under the CC BY\-SA 4\.0 license. The adaptation, *Aquifer Open Bible Dictionary*, was created by BiblioNexus and is also licensed under CC BY\-SA 4\.0\.

This resource has been adapted into multiple languages, including English, Tok Pisin, Arabic (عربي), French (Français), Hindi (हिंदी), Indonesian (Bahasa Indonesia), Portuguese (Português), Russian (Русский), Spanish (Español), Swahili (Kiswahili), and Simplified Chinese (简体中文).



--------------------------------

## Reuben (Place) (id: 8014)

REUBEN (Place)
==============

The territory of Reuben was an area of land east of the Jordan River. This land was given to the tribe of Reuben with the condition that they would help the other Israelite tribes capture the land of Canaan west of the Jordan River ([Numbers 32](https://ref.ly/Num32:1-Num32:42)). Moses agreed to the request from the Reubenites who wanted this land because it was good for raising cattle.

The Arnon River marked the southern border of the territory of Reuben. The stream of Heshbon and the kingdom of Ammon marked the northern and eastern borders. The Jordan River and the Dead Sea marked the western border.

The people of Reuben lived in this territory until around 732 BC, when they were taken into captivity (forced to leave their homeland) by Tiglath\-pileser III, who was the king of Assyria.

*See also* Reuben (Person); Reuben, Tribe of.

* **Associated Passages:** NUM 32:1–NUM 32:42
* **Associated Articles:** Reuben (Person) (ID: `8013@TyndaleBibleDictionary`); Reuben, Tribe of (ID: `8015@TyndaleBibleDictionary`)

