# Aquifer Open Bible Dictionary

**Tyndale Open Bible Dictionary: Aquifer Edition**

This work is an adaptation of *Tyndale Open Bible Dictionary* © 2023 Tyndale House Publishers, licensed under the CC BY\-SA 4\.0 license. The adaptation, *Aquifer Open Bible Dictionary*, was created by BiblioNexus and is also licensed under CC BY\-SA 4\.0\.

This resource has been adapted into multiple languages, including English, Tok Pisin, Arabic (عربي), French (Français), Hindi (हिंदी), Indonesian (Bahasa Indonesia), Portuguese (Português), Russian (Русский), Spanish (Español), Swahili (Kiswahili), and Simplified Chinese (简体中文).



--------------------------------

## Rezeph (id: 8023)

REZEPH
======

A city destroyed by the Assyrians. King Sennacherib of Assyria sent an insulting letter to King Hezekiah of Judah that mentioned this city. The list of the conquered cities of Gozan and Haran and the sons of Eden in Telassar includes Rezeph. The Assyrian king reminded King Hezekiah that the local gods of these cities were not able to protect them from Assyrian conquest. The same would be true for Hezekiah. His God would not preserve Jerusalem ([2 Kings 19:12](https://ref.ly/2Kgs19:12); [Isaiah 37:12](https://ref.ly/Isa37:12)). 

Rezeph was a notable Assyrian city. It was famous for its business and place of government. The Assyrian Empire took control of Rezeph more than a century before Sennacherib confronted King Hezekiah. It could be the same place as the modern Syrian city of Resafa.

* **Associated Passages:** 2KI 19:12; ISA 37:12

