# Aquifer Open Bible Dictionary

**Tyndale Open Bible Dictionary: Aquifer Edition**

This work is an adaptation of *Tyndale Open Bible Dictionary* © 2023 Tyndale House Publishers, licensed under the CC BY\-SA 4\.0 license. The adaptation, *Aquifer Open Bible Dictionary*, was created by BiblioNexus and is also licensed under CC BY\-SA 4\.0\.

This resource has been adapted into multiple languages, including English, Tok Pisin, Arabic (عربي), French (Français), Hindi (हिंदी), Indonesian (Bahasa Indonesia), Portuguese (Português), Russian (Русский), Spanish (Español), Swahili (Kiswahili), and Simplified Chinese (简体中文).



--------------------------------

## Rezin (id: 8025)

REZIN
=====

1\. Syrian monarch who ruled in Damascus during the earlier part of Isaiah’s prophetic ministry and during the last years that the northern 10 tribes existed as a nation. Rezin was used by God to humble both Israel and Judah because they had forsaken him and rejected his covenant ([2 Chr 28:5–6](https://ref.ly/2Chr28:5-2Chr28:6)).

Rezin was born in the town of Bit\-hadara near Damascus in the land of Syria (also called Aram). Upon his accession to the throne, the Syrian people (also called Arameans) reasserted their independence from Israel’s domination. During this period, Assyria was strengthening itself and expanding its empire throughout the Near East. Along with King Menahem of Israel, Rezin was forced to pay tribute to the Assyrian monarch Tiglath\-pileser III in 738 BC. The heavy burden of vassalage to the Assyrians generated anti\-Assyrian sentiment among the Syrian and neighboring people. During this time, Rezin seems to have helped Pekah in his successful coup to seize the throne of Israel. Immediately upon his accession to the throne, Pekah formed an anti\-Assyrian coalition with Rezin. They soon realized that successful resistance against Assyria required a larger alliance. They invited King Ahaz of Judah to join their coalition, but Ahaz adamantly refused. With the intention of placing an Aramean of Davidic lineage upon the throne of Judah in order to effect a broader Syrian\-Israelite alliance, Rezin and Pekah joined in an attack on Judah. In spite of winning most battles, Rezin and Pekah were unsuccessful in their attempt to take Jerusalem and replace Ahaz ([2 Chr 28:5–15](https://ref.ly/2Chr28:5-2Chr28:15); [Is 7:1–9](https://ref.ly/Isa7:1-Isa7:9)). During these dark days for Judah, Isaiah brought an encouraging word to the people. He prophesied the imminent destruction of Israel (Ephraim) and Damascus by Assyria ([Is 7:1–9](https://ref.ly/Isa7:1-Isa7:9); [8:1–8](https://ref.ly/Isa8:1-Isa8:8)). So certain was the destruction of these kingdoms that he referred to their two kings as “stubs of smoldering firebrands” about to be extinguished ([7:4](https://ref.ly/Isa7:4)). Disregarding Isaiah’s prophecy, Ahaz sent a large sum of money to Tiglath\-pileser III, hoping to induce him to come to Judah’s aid.

Rezin and Pekah moved their forces to the north to prepare for the impending Assyrian invasion. Tiglath\-pileser attacked in 733 BC and captured much of the area of Galilee. He then turned his attention to Damascus, to which Rezin had fled. Assyrian records refer to Rezin as a “caged bird” in besieged Damascus. When Damascus fell in 732 BC, Rezin was executed and many citizens of Damascus were exiled. Samaria, the capital city of Israel, fell to the Assyrians in 722 BC. Damascus and the nation of Syria became an Assyrian province. Rezin thus was the last Syrian king to reign in Damascus.

2\. Father of some of the temple servants who served in postexilic times ([Ezr 2:48](https://ref.ly/Ezra2:48); [Neh 7:50](https://ref.ly/Neh7:50)).

* **Associated Passages:** EZR 2:48; NEH 7:50; ISA 7:4; ISA 7:1–ISA 7:9; 2CH 28:5–2CH 28:6; 2CH 28:5–2CH 28:15; ISA 8:1–ISA 8:8

