# Aquifer Open Bible Dictionary

**Tyndale Open Bible Dictionary: Aquifer Edition**

This work is an adaptation of *Tyndale Open Bible Dictionary* © 2023 Tyndale House Publishers, licensed under the CC BY\-SA 4\.0 license. The adaptation, *Aquifer Open Bible Dictionary*, was created by BiblioNexus and is also licensed under CC BY\-SA 4\.0\.

This resource has been adapted into multiple languages, including English, Tok Pisin, Arabic (عربي), French (Français), Hindi (हिंदी), Indonesian (Bahasa Indonesia), Portuguese (Português), Russian (Русский), Spanish (Español), Swahili (Kiswahili), and Simplified Chinese (简体中文).



--------------------------------

## Rizpah (id: 8051)

RIZPAH
======

Rizpah was the daughter of Aiah. She was a concubine (secondary wife) of King Saul. She gave birth to two sons named Armoni and Mephibosheth.

After Saul died, there was a conflict between two leaders: Ishbosheth and Abner. Ishbosheth accused Abner of having sexual relations with Rizpah. . In that time, this could be seen as trying to take the king’s place. Abner became angry and promised to help David become king instead ([2 Samuel 3:7–10](https://ref.ly/2Sam3:7-2Sam3:10)). 

Later, during David’s reign, there was a famine. God said it happened because Saul had killed many Gibeonites. To make peace, David gave seven of Saul’s descendants to the Gibeonites. Rizpah’s two sons were among them. The Gibeonites killed them.

Rizpah stayed with the bodies of her sons. She protected them from birds and wild animals until King David had them buried properly ([2 Samuel 21:8–11](https://ref.ly/2Sam21:8-2Sam21:11)).

* **Associated Passages:** 2SA 21:8–2SA 21:11; 2SA 3:7–2SA 3:10

