# Aquifer Open Bible Dictionary

**Tyndale Open Bible Dictionary: Aquifer Edition**

This work is an adaptation of *Tyndale Open Bible Dictionary* © 2023 Tyndale House Publishers, licensed under the CC BY\-SA 4\.0 license. The adaptation, *Aquifer Open Bible Dictionary*, was created by BiblioNexus and is also licensed under CC BY\-SA 4\.0\.

This resource has been adapted into multiple languages, including English, Tok Pisin, Arabic (عربي), French (Français), Hindi (हिंदी), Indonesian (Bahasa Indonesia), Portuguese (Português), Russian (Русский), Spanish (Español), Swahili (Kiswahili), and Simplified Chinese (简体中文).



--------------------------------

## Rue (id: 8068)

RUE
===

Rue is an aromatic plant from Eurasia with evergreen leaves that produce a strong\-smelling oil once used in medicine.

There is little question about the correctness of the translation of "rue" in [Luke 11:42](https://ref.ly/Luke11:42), but there is some doubt about the exact species. Most scholars think that it was the common rue *(Rue graveolens)*, a perennial shrubby plant with straight stems 0\.6 to 0\.9 meter (2 to 3 feet) tall and deeply cut leaves. A very strong odor comes from the leaves. This species is native to the Mediterranean region and grows wild in the Holy Land, especially on Mount Tabor.

Ancient people highly valued rue as a medicine. They believed it could prevent dizziness, inability to speak, epilepsy (seizures), eye inflammations, mental illness, and the "evil eye" (a belief that someone could cause harm by looking at another person). Rue was also used for adding flavor to food.

* **Associated Passages:** LUK 11:42
* **Associated Articles:** Plants (ID: `7761@Unknown`)

