# Aquifer Open Bible Dictionary

**Tyndale Open Bible Dictionary: Aquifer Edition**

This work is an adaptation of *Tyndale Open Bible Dictionary* © 2023 Tyndale House Publishers, licensed under the CC BY\-SA 4\.0 license. The adaptation, *Aquifer Open Bible Dictionary*, was created by BiblioNexus and is also licensed under CC BY\-SA 4\.0\.

This resource has been adapted into multiple languages, including English, Tok Pisin, Arabic (عربي), French (Français), Hindi (हिंदी), Indonesian (Bahasa Indonesia), Portuguese (Português), Russian (Русский), Spanish (Español), Swahili (Kiswahili), and Simplified Chinese (简体中文).



--------------------------------

## Salome (id: 8112)

SALOME
======

The name Salome comes from the Hebrew greeting *shalom,* which means peace. The style of the name with the added letter "e" at the end is Greek.

1. A woman called Salome was a follower of Jesus. She may have been Mary’s sister and the mother of James and John. In [Mark 15:40](https://ref.ly/Mark15:40), the evangelist describes the women who stood at the foot of the cross. Three women are named: Mary Magdalene, Mary the mother of James the lesser and of Joses, and Salome.

    Mark later describes the women who arrived at the tomb at dawn. Mark recounts that Mary Magdalene, Mary the mother of James, and Salome had brought spices to anoint the body y ([Mark 16:1](https://ref.ly/Mark16:1)).

    Matthew speaks of two women named Mary, and the mother of the sons of Zebedee, who could have been Salome ([Matthew 27:56](https://ref.ly/Matt27:56)).

    John speaks of four women:

    1. Mary the mother of Jesus;
        2. Mary the wife of Clopas;
        3. Mary Magdalene; and
        4. Mary’s sister (not named mentioned by name in [John 19:25](https://ref.ly/John19:25)).
        If Mary’s sister was Salome, she and the mother of the sons of Zebedee were likely the same person. This would make James and John, the sons of Zebedee, cousins to Jesus.

2. Daughter of Herodias, from her first marriage to Herod Philip. Neither [Matthew 14:6](https://ref.ly/Matt14:6) or [Mark 6:22](https://ref.ly/Mark6:22) mention her by name, but according to tradition, Salome is the girl who pleased Herod with her dancing. As a reward, Herod promised her on oath anything she asked for up to half his kingdom. Prompted by her mother, she demanded the head of John the Baptist.

* **Associated Passages:** MAT 14:6; MAT 27:56; MRK 6:22; MRK 15:40; MRK 16:1; JHN 19:25

