# Aquifer Open Bible Dictionary

**Tyndale Open Bible Dictionary: Aquifer Edition**

This work is an adaptation of *Tyndale Open Bible Dictionary* © 2023 Tyndale House Publishers, licensed under the CC BY\-SA 4\.0 license. The adaptation, *Aquifer Open Bible Dictionary*, was created by BiblioNexus and is also licensed under CC BY\-SA 4\.0\.

This resource has been adapted into multiple languages, including English, Tok Pisin, Arabic (عربي), French (Français), Hindi (हिंदी), Indonesian (Bahasa Indonesia), Portuguese (Português), Russian (Русский), Spanish (Español), Swahili (Kiswahili), and Simplified Chinese (简体中文).



--------------------------------

## Samson (id: 8126)

SAMSON
======

The son of Manoah, from Dan’s tribe. Samson's mother's name is not given in the Bible. She had been unable to have children, but the angel of the Lord announced to her that she would have a son. He was to be as dedicated as a Nazirite all his life. This meant he was not to drink wine or strong drink, not to eat anything ceremonially unclean, and not to allow a razor to touch his head ([Numbers 6:1–6](https://ref.ly/Num6:1-Num6:6)). She was also told that he would begin to deliver Israel from the Philistines, who had ruled over Israel for 40 years ([Judges 13:1–5](https://ref.ly/Judg13:1-Judg13:5)). 

Samson's Birth and Early Life
-----------------------------

She reported this to her husband, Manoah, and Manoah prayed about this angelic visit (verse [8](https://ref.ly/Judg13:8)). The angel of the Lord appeared again and gave instructions about the child who was to be born. Manoah made a burnt offering, and the angel of the Lord went up to heaven in the smoke. Manoah feared that they would die, for he now realized that they had seen God (verse [22](https://ref.ly/Judg13:22)). The child was born and the Lord blessed him as he grew. The Spirit of the Lord moved upon him in Mahaneh\-dan (verse [25](https://ref.ly/Judg13:25)).

Samson's Marriage
-----------------

Samson went to Timnah and saw a Philistine woman whom he wished to marry. The Lord was seeking an opportunity against the Philistines. In Samson’s case, these occasions came through Philistine women. When Samson and his parents went to Timnah to arrange the marriage, a lion came out of the vineyards. Samson, upon whom the Spirit of the Lord came mightily, tore the lion in half. Later he found that a swarm of bees had made honey in the carcass of the lion ([Judges 14:2–9](https://ref.ly/Judg14:2-Judg14:9)).

Samson made a feast at Timnah, as was the custom. He told the Philistine men a riddle that involved the lion and the honey. They made a wager on the riddle and the Philistines convinced Samson's new wife to learn the answer and share the information with them. When they came up with the answer, Samson knew what had happened. He went out and killed 30 Philistine men to pay for his bet ([Judges 14:19](https://ref.ly/Judg14:19)). Samson went home, and his father\-in\-law gave Samson’s wife to Samson’s best man.

When Samson returned to see his wife, he was not allowed to visit her. In revenge, Samson took 300 foxes and tied them in pairs tail to tail. He fixed a torch to each pair and turned them loose in the grainfields of the Philistines so that the harvested grain bundles and growing crops were burned. Consequently, the Philistines came and burned his wife and her father. In revenge, Samson went out and slaughtered many of them ([Judges 15:1–8](https://ref.ly/Judg15:1-Judg15:8)).

More Conflict with the Philistines
----------------------------------

The Philistines then came against Judah. The people of Judah bound Samson with new ropes to turn him over to the Philistines. When they came to Lehi, where the Philistines were camped, the Spirit of the Lord came on him mightily. Samson snapped the ropes, seized the jawbone of a donkey, and killed 1,000 Philistines. Being very thirsty, he cried to the Lord, so God opened a spring of water at Lehi ([Judges 15:9–20](https://ref.ly/Judg15:9-Judg15:20)).

Samson’s weakness for Philistine women continued to create trouble for both him and the Philistines. He went down to Gaza, where he became involved with a prostitute ([Judges 16:1](https://ref.ly/Judg16:1)). The men of the city learned that he was there and plotted to kill him at dawn. Samson got up at midnight and walked off with the doors, posts, and bar of the city gate and put them on top of the hill before Hebron.

Samson and Delilah
------------------

Then he found Delilah, from the valley of Sorek. The Philistines enlisted her by bribery to find out the source of his strength ([Judges 16:4–5](https://ref.ly/Judg16:4-Judg16:5)). She kept pestering him, so he told her that if they bound him with seven fresh bowstrings he would be as weak as other men. She bound him and cried, "The Philistines are upon you." He easily broke the bowstrings. 

In response to her continued questions, he kept lying to her about the secret of his strength. In succession, she bound him with new ropes and seven locks of his hair woven together and attached to a loom. Finally, she wore him down and he told her the truth. If someone shaved his head and broke his Nazirite vow, his strength would be gone. While Samson slept with his head on her knees, she called a barber, who shaved off his hair. This time when she cried, "The Philistines are upon you," the Philistines seized him, gouged out his eyes, and took him to Gaza (verse [21](https://ref.ly/Judg16:21)).

At Gaza, Samson was bound with bronze chains and forced to labor at a mill, during which time his hair began to grow again. The Philistines celebrated a great festival at the temple of their god, Dagon. They celebrated their victory over Samson and asked that he be brought in so they could mock him. Some 3,000 people watched while Samson entertained them. At his request, Samson was placed between the two pillars supporting the temple. He asked the Lord for strength and pushed against the pillars so that the entire building collapsed. Samson died with the Philistines as he had requested, but he killed more Philistines in this final act than he had before ([Judges 16:1–30](https://ref.ly/Judg16:1-Judg16:30)).

Samson’s family came to retrieve his body, and they buried him between Zorah and Eshtaol in the tomb of his father, Manoah. He had served as "judge," or leader, of Israel for 20 years ([Judges 16:31](https://ref.ly/Judg16:31)).

*See also* Israel, History of; Judges, Book of.

* **Associated Passages:** JDG 13:8; JDG 13:22; JDG 13:25; JDG 14:19; JDG 16:1; JDG 16:21; JDG 16:31; NUM 6:1–NUM 6:6; JDG 13:1–JDG 13:5; JDG 14:2–JDG 14:9; JDG 15:1–JDG 15:8; JDG 15:9–JDG 15:20; JDG 16:4–JDG 16:5; JDG 16:1–JDG 16:30
* **Associated Articles:** History of Israel (ID: `6092@TyndaleBibleDictionary`); Judges, Book of (ID: `6490@TyndaleBibleDictionary`)

