# Aquifer Open Bible Dictionary

**Tyndale Open Bible Dictionary: Aquifer Edition**

This work is an adaptation of *Tyndale Open Bible Dictionary* © 2023 Tyndale House Publishers, licensed under the CC BY\-SA 4\.0 license. The adaptation, *Aquifer Open Bible Dictionary*, was created by BiblioNexus and is also licensed under CC BY\-SA 4\.0\.

This resource has been adapted into multiple languages, including English, Tok Pisin, Arabic (عربي), French (Français), Hindi (हिंदी), Indonesian (Bahasa Indonesia), Portuguese (Português), Russian (Русский), Spanish (Español), Swahili (Kiswahili), and Simplified Chinese (简体中文).



--------------------------------

## Seraph, Seraphim (id: 8235)

SERAPH\*, SERAPHIM
==================

Angelic beings mentioned only twice in the Bible, both occurring in the same chapter of Isaiah ([Is 6:2, 6](https://ref.ly/Isa6:2,Isa6:6)). The word seraphim is plural in number, but it is impossible to say from Isaiah’s vision just how many he saw. The prophet spoke of them as though they were quite familiar spiritual beings, which seems a little curious since they are not mentioned elsewhere.

Isaiah described each seraph as having six wings: two shielded the face, two covered the feet, and the remaining pair enabled the seraph to fly. The most that can be said from the available evidence is that they were exalted spiritual entities who were occupied constantly in the praise and worship of God. Most probably the seraphim were an order of celestial beings comparable in nature to the cherubim and engaged in a somewhat similar form of service around the divine throne.

*See also* Angel; Cherub, Cherubim.

* **Associated Passages:** ISA 6:2; ISA 6:6
* **Associated Articles:** Angel (ID: `3611@TyndaleBibleDictionary`); Cherub, Cherubim (ID: `4510@TyndaleBibleDictionary`)

