# Aquifer Open Bible Dictionary

**Tyndale Open Bible Dictionary: Aquifer Edition**

This work is an adaptation of *Tyndale Open Bible Dictionary* © 2023 Tyndale House Publishers, licensed under the CC BY\-SA 4\.0 license. The adaptation, *Aquifer Open Bible Dictionary*, was created by BiblioNexus and is also licensed under CC BY\-SA 4\.0\.

This resource has been adapted into multiple languages, including English, Tok Pisin, Arabic (عربي), French (Français), Hindi (हिंदी), Indonesian (Bahasa Indonesia), Portuguese (Português), Russian (Русский), Spanish (Español), Swahili (Kiswahili), and Simplified Chinese (简体中文).



--------------------------------

## Seal (id: 8181)

SEAL
====

Small engraved object widely used in the ancient Near East to produce an image in soft clay.

Origin
------

The exact origin of seals cannot be determined. The first seal probably developed from the amulet, whose purpose was to give protection to its wearer or to ward off evil. At one time a seal was believed to have some kind of magical protective power that would bring a curse or harm to the unauthorized person who dared to break it to obtain the contents it protected. Primitive seals were little more than tiny clay spools scratched with twigs to produce simple designs or figures. Glyptic art (the technical name for engraving or carving of seals on gems) flourished in the ancient Near East from the fourth millennium BC to the end of the Persian period in the fourth century BC.

Types of Seals
--------------

### Stamp Seals

Seals were produced in many shapes and sizes, the earliest being the stamp seal, a flat engraved gem or bead that produced a copy of itself when pressed against soft clay. It was superseded about 3000 BC in Mesopotamia by the cylinder seal and began to be used again only at the end of the eighth century BC; by Hellenistic times it had replaced the cylinder seal altogether.

### Cylinder Seals

The cylinder seal first appeared in Mesopotamia before 3000 BC and became the most widely used kind of seal until the middle of the first millennium BC. Its use in Egypt is evidence of early Mesopotamian cultural influence upon Egypt; however, it was soon replaced there by the scarab (beetle\-shaped) seal, which was better adapted for sealing papyrus documents. Symbols or designs were carved on the outside of the cylinder, which left their imprint when the seal was rolled over the wet clay. Some of the earliest symbols used were geometric designs or representations of some magical symbol. Later seals depicted everything from mythology (deities seated conversing with each other, receiving worshipers in audience, riding in a boat or chariot, or fighting an enemy) to scenes from everyday life (hunting, marrying, banqueting, feeding animals, fighting wild beasts, offering sacrifices to the deity, warring, leading prisoners away) and representations of animals, flowers, and birds. Writing (e.g., the owner’s name or a declaration of loyalty to a god or king) began to appear on seals in the third millennium BC. Because of the great number and variety of seals that have been found, they are invaluable for what they reveal about ancient peoples—how they dressed, their hairstyles, furniture, utensils, and religious beliefs.

Seals were so widely used and have been unearthed in such quantity in the ancient Near East that they can be dated within a century or two of their origin, though sometimes it is difficult to determine the exact period or country of origin. Herodotus observed that every Babylonian gentleman “carries a seal and a walking stick” (Book I, 195\). The seal was suspended by a cord about the neck or the wrist or attached to some part of the owner’s clothing (cf. [Gn 38:18](https://ref.ly/Gen38:18); [41:42](https://ref.ly/Gen41:42); [Sg 8:6](https://ref.ly/Song8:6); [Jer 22:24](https://ref.ly/Jer22:24)). Graves have been found with cylinders tied to the wrists of the skeletons.

Another type of seal was the jar handle seal. Cloth was placed over the neck of a bottle, soft clay was smeared on top of the binding cord, and then the seal was pressed into the wet clay. The unbroken seal showed that the merchandise had not been opened before delivery. In Judea the seal was impressed on jar handles as evidence of ownership. Some jar handle stamps were probably trademarks of pottery factories; some bear private names (perhaps the owner of the factory). The so\-called royal jar handle stamps contain either a four\-winged or two\-winged symbol and a short inscription consisting of two lines. The line above reads “belonging to the king,” and the lower line contains the name of a city, probably where the jar was made.

Uses
----

### Functional Uses

Since their first creation as amulets, seals continued to serve as signals of protection. An unbroken seal proved that the contents had not been tampered with, whether on a document, a granary door, or a wine jar. The lions’ den into which Daniel was cast was sealed with the king’s signet and those of his nobles ([Dn 6:17](https://ref.ly/Dan6:17)). Jesus’ tomb was secured by sealing the stone ([Mt 27:66](https://ref.ly/Matt27:66)). The seal also served as a mark of ownership or as a trademark (e.g., placed on pottery before firing). It was also used to validate documents (letters, bills of sale, government documents, etc.). Jezebel wrote letters in her husband’s name and sealed them with his seal, thus bringing about the death of Naboth ([1 Kgs 21:8–13](https://ref.ly/1Kgs21:8-1Kgs21:13)). Jeremiah sealed a deed of purchase when he bought a kinsman’s land ([Jer 32:10–14](https://ref.ly/Jer32:10-Jer32:14)). An edict with the Persian king’s seal could not be revoked ([Est 8:8](https://ref.ly/Esth8:8)).

### Symbolic Use

Symbolic use of the seal is found both in nonbiblical and biblical literature. A Babylonian prayer says, “Like a seal may my sins be torn away.” The OT says, “Seal the teaching among my disciples” ([Is 8:16](https://ref.ly/Isa8:16), rsv). Zerubbabel was told he would become God’s signet ring ([Hg 2:23](https://ref.ly/Hag2:23)). The earth took shape like clay pressed by a signet ring ([Jb 38:14](https://ref.ly/Job38:14)).

The word is used symbolically in the NT to designate God’s personal ownership. For example, the Scriptures say that God’s seal is on Jesus, his Son ([Jn 3:33](https://ref.ly/John3:33); [6:27](https://ref.ly/John6:27)). This means that Jesus bears God’s personal name; Jesus is God’s personal expression. The Scriptures also say that the Holy Spirit seals the believers ([2 Cor 1:22](https://ref.ly/2Cor1:22); [Eph 1:13](https://ref.ly/Eph1:13); [4:30](https://ref.ly/Eph4:30)). This means that the Spirit is God’s mark of ownership on the believers, and it means that the Spirit protects and preserves the believers throughout their lives.

*See also* Archaeology and the Bible; Inscriptions.

* **Associated Passages:** GEN 38:18; GEN 41:42; EST 8:8; JOB 38:14; SNG 8:6; ISA 8:16; JER 22:24; DAN 6:17; HAG 2:23; MAT 27:66; JHN 3:33; JHN 6:27; 2CO 1:22; EPH 1:13; EPH 4:30; 1KI 21:8–1KI 21:13; JER 32:10–JER 32:14
* **Associated Articles:** Archaeology and the Bible (ID: `3713@TyndaleBibleDictionary`); Inscriptions (ID: `6028@TyndaleBibleDictionary`)

