# Aquifer Open Bible Dictionary

**Tyndale Open Bible Dictionary: Aquifer Edition**

This work is an adaptation of *Tyndale Open Bible Dictionary* © 2023 Tyndale House Publishers, licensed under the CC BY\-SA 4\.0 license. The adaptation, *Aquifer Open Bible Dictionary*, was created by BiblioNexus and is also licensed under CC BY\-SA 4\.0\.

This resource has been adapted into multiple languages, including English, Tok Pisin, Arabic (عربي), French (Français), Hindi (हिंदी), Indonesian (Bahasa Indonesia), Portuguese (Português), Russian (Русский), Spanish (Español), Swahili (Kiswahili), and Simplified Chinese (简体中文).



--------------------------------

## Shammai (id: 8281)

SHAMMAI
=======

1\. Onam’s son, brother of Jada and the father of Nadab and Abishur from Judah’s tribe ([1 Chr 2:28, 32](https://ref.ly/1Chr2:28,1Chr2:32)).

2\. Rekem’s son and the father of Maon from Caleb’s house ([1 Chr 2:44–45](https://ref.ly/1Chr2:44-1Chr2:45)).

3\. Mered’s son by Bithiah, Pharaoh’s daughter, and a descendant of Caleb ([1 Chr 4:17–18](https://ref.ly/1Chr4:17-1Chr4:18)).

4\. Prominent rabbi whose life spanned the period 50 BC to AD 30\. His name is most frequently coupled with that of his equally famous contemporary, Hillel, who was president of the Sanhedrin while Shammai was vice\-president. Shammai had the reputation for being strict and rigid in his application of the law and severely literal in his interpretation of the Scriptures, while Hillel was more liberal and humane in applying the law and more imaginative in the use of the Scriptures. Shammai was renowned for his hatred of Roman domination and tried to forbid Jewish people from buying food or drink from Gentiles.

Two schools of interpretation followed these two contemporaries—“the house of Shammai” and “the house of Hillel”—continuing to the time of the compilation of the Mishnah, though the house of Hillel seems to have gradually gained ascendancy over the house of Shammai. The debates and conversations between the two rabbis or the two schools are recorded in the Mishnah and the Talmud, pertaining to such matters as offerings, priestly dues, tithes, Levitical cleanness and uncleanness, the observance of the Sabbath, marriage and divorce.

*See also* Hillel; Judaism; Pharisees; Talmud.

* **Associated Passages:** 1CH 2:28; 1CH 2:32; 1CH 4:17–1CH 4:18; 1CH 2:44–1CH 2:45
* **Associated Articles:** Hillel (ID: `5853@TyndaleBibleDictionary`); Judaism (ID: `6478@TyndaleBibleDictionary`); Pharisees (ID: `7696@TyndaleBibleDictionary`); Talmud (ID: `8724@TyndaleBibleDictionary`)

