# Aquifer Open Bible Dictionary

**Tyndale Open Bible Dictionary: Aquifer Edition**

This work is an adaptation of *Tyndale Open Bible Dictionary* © 2023 Tyndale House Publishers, licensed under the CC BY\-SA 4\.0 license. The adaptation, *Aquifer Open Bible Dictionary*, was created by BiblioNexus and is also licensed under CC BY\-SA 4\.0\.

This resource has been adapted into multiple languages, including English, Tok Pisin, Arabic (عربي), French (Français), Hindi (हिंदी), Indonesian (Bahasa Indonesia), Portuguese (Português), Russian (Русский), Spanish (Español), Swahili (Kiswahili), and Simplified Chinese (简体中文).



--------------------------------

## Shibboleth (id: 8385)

SHIBBOLETH
==========

Term used by Jephthah to detect the Ephraimites at the banks of the Jordan River ([Jgs 12:6](https://ref.ly/Judg12:6)). After the battle, many Ephraimites tried to escape by crossing the Jordan and returning to their own land. When each of them came to the river, he was asked by one of Jephthah’s soldiers to say “shibboleth.” An Ephraimite could not pronounce the word with the same accent as Jephthah’s men and was thus discovered and immediately killed.

The exact problem in pronunciation is not known. Two possibilities exist. First, the Ephraimites had no sound comparable to “sh.” Thus, they pronounced “sh” as “s” (“shibboleth” becoming “sibboleth”). Second, the Gileadites pronounced “sh” as “th,” a sound which was unknown to the Ephraimites, who pronounced it as “s.” Thus, “shibboleth” was pronounced “thibboleth” by the Gileadites and “sibboleth” by the Ephraimites.

* **Associated Passages:** JDG 12:6

