# Aquifer Open Bible Dictionary

**Tyndale Open Bible Dictionary: Aquifer Edition**

This work is an adaptation of *Tyndale Open Bible Dictionary* © 2023 Tyndale House Publishers, licensed under the CC BY\-SA 4\.0 license. The adaptation, *Aquifer Open Bible Dictionary*, was created by BiblioNexus and is also licensed under CC BY\-SA 4\.0\.

This resource has been adapted into multiple languages, including English, Tok Pisin, Arabic (عربي), French (Français), Hindi (हिंदी), Indonesian (Bahasa Indonesia), Portuguese (Português), Russian (Русский), Spanish (Español), Swahili (Kiswahili), and Simplified Chinese (简体中文).



--------------------------------

## Shulammite (id: 8460)

SHULAMMITE
==========

The name or title of Solomon’s lover in his love poem ([Song of Solomon 6:13](https://ref.ly/Song6:13)). We do not know exactly who she was. Some people think she came from a small city called Shunem in ancient Israel. Her name, "Shunammite," sounds a lot like Solomon's name in Hebrew, which might be why she is called Shulammite instead of Shunammite.

Shunem was a city in the land of Issachar near Mount Gilboa ([1 Samuel 28:4](https://ref.ly/1Sam28:4)). The city was famous for one story about a beautiful young woman named Abishag. She was called from Shunem to take care of King David in his later years ([1 Kings 1:1–4, 15](https://ref.ly/1Kgs1:1-1Kgs1:4,1Kgs1:15); [2:17–22](https://ref.ly/1Kgs2:17-1Kgs2:22)). Some people think Abishag might be the same woman as the Shulammite in Solomon's love poem.

*See also* Shunem.

* **Associated Passages:** 1SA 28:4; 1KI 1:15; SNG 6:13; 1KI 1:1–1KI 1:4; 1KI 2:17–1KI 2:22
* **Associated Articles:** Shunem (ID: `8463@TyndaleBibleDictionary`)

