# Aquifer Open Bible Dictionary

**Tyndale Open Bible Dictionary: Aquifer Edition**

This work is an adaptation of *Tyndale Open Bible Dictionary* © 2023 Tyndale House Publishers, licensed under the CC BY\-SA 4\.0 license. The adaptation, *Aquifer Open Bible Dictionary*, was created by BiblioNexus and is also licensed under CC BY\-SA 4\.0\.

This resource has been adapted into multiple languages, including English, Tok Pisin, Arabic (عربي), French (Français), Hindi (हिंदी), Indonesian (Bahasa Indonesia), Portuguese (Português), Russian (Русский), Spanish (Español), Swahili (Kiswahili), and Simplified Chinese (简体中文).



--------------------------------

## Shunem (id: 8463)

SHUNEM
======

Village of Issachar’s tribe ([Jos 19:18](https://ref.ly/Josh19:18)) strategically located in the Jezreel Valley. Shunem (modern Sulem) is about three and a half miles (5\.6 kilometers) north of Jezreel, situated on the outer hills of Mt Moreh. Both Shunem and Jezreel guard the eastern approach to the Jezreel Valley from Beth\-shan through the valley of Harod. This strategic location explains the appearance of Shunem on city lists of various foreign invaders: the lists of Thutmose III (15th century BC); the Amarna Letters (15th century BC), which mention it in conjunction with Megiddo; and the tenth\-century BC record at Karnak of the Egyptian Shishak, who listed Shunem’s importance.

The Philistines used Shunem to launch their siege of the Israelite forces at Jezreel ([1 Sm 28–31](https://ref.ly/1Sam28:1-1Sam31:13)). Because Shunem was on a well\-used route, Elijah frequented the town and even resided there ([2 Kgs 4:8](https://ref.ly/2Kgs4:8)). Later, Elijah raised a woman’s son from death (vv [32–37](https://ref.ly/2Kgs4:32-2Kgs4:37)). During the latter years of the reign of David, a beautiful woman from Shunem named Abishag was summoned to care for the ailing king ([1 Kgs 1:3, 15](https://ref.ly/1Kgs1:3,1Kgs1:15)). After David’s death, Abishag appears in the story of the rivalry between Adonijah (David’s eldest son) and Solomon. Adonijah requests Abishag for his own, once Solomon gains the throne, but the king views his brother’s interest as presumption—and a possible attempt at his throne ([2:13–25](https://ref.ly/1Kgs2:13-1Kgs2:25)).

*See also* Abishag; Shulammite.

* **Associated Passages:** JOS 19:18; 1KI 1:3; 1KI 1:15; 2KI 4:8; 1KI 2:13–1KI 2:25; 2KI 4:32–2KI 4:37; 1SA 28:1–1SA 31:13
* **Associated Articles:** Abishag (ID: `3309@TyndaleBibleDictionary`); Shulammite (ID: `8460@TyndaleBibleDictionary`)

