# Aquifer Open Bible Dictionary

**Tyndale Open Bible Dictionary: Aquifer Edition**

This work is an adaptation of *Tyndale Open Bible Dictionary* © 2023 Tyndale House Publishers, licensed under the CC BY\-SA 4\.0 license. The adaptation, *Aquifer Open Bible Dictionary*, was created by BiblioNexus and is also licensed under CC BY\-SA 4\.0\.

This resource has been adapted into multiple languages, including English, Tok Pisin, Arabic (عربي), French (Français), Hindi (हिंदी), Indonesian (Bahasa Indonesia), Portuguese (Português), Russian (Русский), Spanish (Español), Swahili (Kiswahili), and Simplified Chinese (简体中文).



--------------------------------

## Shihor (id: 8391)

SHIHOR
======

Body of water in Egypt. The name is Egyptian and is given as a boundary of the land to be possessed by the Hebrews ([Jos 13:3](https://ref.ly/Josh13:3)). [First Chronicles 13:5](https://ref.ly/1Chr13:5) refers to Shihor as the southwestern limit of Israelite settlement in the time of David. Isaiah speaks of grain from the region of Shihor as a source of income for the city of Sidon ([Is 23:3](https://ref.ly/Isa23:3)). Jeremiah describes Shihor as “the waters of the Nile” ([Jer 2:18](https://ref.ly/Jer2:18)). Some believe that the Shihor was the easternmost branch of the Nile Delta. Others identify the Shihor with the Wadi el\-Arish, 90 miles (144\.8 kilometers) east of the Suez Canal. Still others identify it with the Brook (or River) of Egypt, a body of water whose precise location cannot be determined with certainty.

*See also* Brook of Egypt; Nile River.

* **Associated Passages:** JOS 13:3; 1CH 13:5; ISA 23:3; JER 2:18
* **Associated Articles:** Brook of Egypt (ID: `4347@TyndaleBibleDictionary`); Nile River (ID: `7404@TyndaleBibleDictionary`)

