# Aquifer Open Bible Dictionary

**Tyndale Open Bible Dictionary: Aquifer Edition**

This work is an adaptation of *Tyndale Open Bible Dictionary* © 2023 Tyndale House Publishers, licensed under the CC BY\-SA 4\.0 license. The adaptation, *Aquifer Open Bible Dictionary*, was created by BiblioNexus and is also licensed under CC BY\-SA 4\.0\.

This resource has been adapted into multiple languages, including English, Tok Pisin, Arabic (عربي), French (Français), Hindi (हिंदी), Indonesian (Bahasa Indonesia), Portuguese (Português), Russian (Русский), Spanish (Español), Swahili (Kiswahili), and Simplified Chinese (简体中文).



--------------------------------

## Simon Maccabeus (id: 8503)

SIMON MACCABEUS
===============

The second son of Mattathias was successor to his brother Jonathan. In 142 BC Simon (d. 135 BC) negotiated a treaty with Syria by supporting Demetrius II against the plunderer Trypho. Under this treaty, Judea was recognized as politically independent. The Syrians were finally driven from the citadel at Jerusalem and “the yoke of the Gentiles was removed from Israel” ([1 Macc 13:41](https://ref.ly/1Macc13:41)). In 141 BC “the Jews and their priests decided that Simon should be their leader and high priest forever until a trustworthy prophet should arise” ([14:41](https://ref.ly/1Macc14:41)). These two offices were made hereditary in the Hasmonean family. Simon Maccabeus is considered perhaps the best leader of Israel in the postexilic period. Antiochus VII invaded Israel in 133 BC and was defeated by Simon’s sons, Judas and John, at Modin. This was the single interruption in six years of prosperous rule. Simon and his sons were assassinated by his son\-in\-law and chief rival for power, Ptolemy son of Abub. John Hyrcanus (d. 104 BC), Simon’s youngest son, escaped and succeeded to his father’s position before Ptolemy could reach Jerusalem. John ruled from 134 to 104 BC.

* **Associated Passages:** 1MA 13:41; 1MA 14:41

