# Aquifer Open Bible Dictionary

**Tyndale Open Bible Dictionary: Aquifer Edition**

This work is an adaptation of *Tyndale Open Bible Dictionary* © 2023 Tyndale House Publishers, licensed under the CC BY\-SA 4\.0 license. The adaptation, *Aquifer Open Bible Dictionary*, was created by BiblioNexus and is also licensed under CC BY\-SA 4\.0\.

This resource has been adapted into multiple languages, including English, Tok Pisin, Arabic (عربي), French (Français), Hindi (हिंदी), Indonesian (Bahasa Indonesia), Portuguese (Português), Russian (Русский), Spanish (Español), Swahili (Kiswahili), and Simplified Chinese (简体中文).



--------------------------------

## Stonecutter (id: 8627)

STONECUTTER
===========

A stonecutter is a skilled worker who cuts and shapes stone for buildings. These workers would remove stone from quarries and prepare it for use in large structures like palaces, temples, government buildings, and wealthy homes ([1 Kings 5:18](https://ref.ly/1Kgs5:18), [2 Kings 12:12](https://ref.ly/2Kgs12:12); [1 Chronicles 22:2, 15](https://ref.ly/1Chr22:2,1Chr22:15)). 

At first, the Israelites used stonecutters from Phoenicia. But, they soon learned how to cut and shape stones themselves. After learning these skills, the Israelites built many impressive buildings, including those in the city of Samaria. Later, King Herod's stonecutters created beautiful stone buildings that can still be seen today in Jerusalem, Hebron, Samaria, and other places.

Some stonecutters specialized in detailed work for the inside of buildings, making stone pieces for windows, doors, and pillars. A special group called engravers worked with precious stones to make seals (carved stones used as signatures), decorative items, and jewelry ([Exodus 28:11](https://ref.ly/Exod28:11)).

* **Associated Passages:** EXO 28:11; 1KI 5:18; 2KI 12:12; 1CH 22:2; 1CH 22:15

