# Aquifer Open Bible Dictionary

**Tyndale Open Bible Dictionary: Aquifer Edition**

This work is an adaptation of *Tyndale Open Bible Dictionary* © 2023 Tyndale House Publishers, licensed under the CC BY\-SA 4\.0 license. The adaptation, *Aquifer Open Bible Dictionary*, was created by BiblioNexus and is also licensed under CC BY\-SA 4\.0\.

This resource has been adapted into multiple languages, including English, Tok Pisin, Arabic (عربي), French (Français), Hindi (हिंदी), Indonesian (Bahasa Indonesia), Portuguese (Português), Russian (Русский), Spanish (Español), Swahili (Kiswahili), and Simplified Chinese (简体中文).



--------------------------------

## Solomon, Pools of (id: 8563)

SOLOMON\*, Pools of
===================

Water\-storage pools, whose construction has been attributed to Solomon. Solomon made pools for watering his vineyards, gardens, parks, and orchards ([Eccl 2:4–6](https://ref.ly/Eccl2:4-Eccl2:6)), but their location is uncertain.

The so\-called pools of Solomon are situated in the valley of Etham, about ten miles (16\.1 kilometers) south of Jerusalem and a little south of Bethlehem. The three reservoirs, which are somewhat rectangular in shape, are placed at different levels. They vary in size, with the highest the smallest and the lowest the largest. The lower pool is 582 feet (177\.4 meters) long, 148 to 207 feet (45\.1 to 63\.1 meters) wide, and 50 feet (15\.2 meters) deep. The small pool is also the most shallow, having a depth of only 15 feet (4\.6 meters).

The pools are partly rock\-cut and in part built of masonry; they are connected by conduits, and the lower end of the biggest pool serves as a dam. The water is supplied by springs and run\-off rainwater. The estimated capacity of all three pools is about 40 million gallons (151\.4 million liters).

*See also* Aqueduct.

* **Associated Passages:** ECC 2:4–ECC 2:6
* **Associated Articles:** Aqueduct (ID: `3683@TyndaleBibleDictionary`)

