# Aquifer Open Bible Dictionary

**Tyndale Open Bible Dictionary: Aquifer Edition**

This work is an adaptation of *Tyndale Open Bible Dictionary* © 2023 Tyndale House Publishers, licensed under the CC BY\-SA 4\.0 license. The adaptation, *Aquifer Open Bible Dictionary*, was created by BiblioNexus and is also licensed under CC BY\-SA 4\.0\.

This resource has been adapted into multiple languages, including English, Tok Pisin, Arabic (عربي), French (Français), Hindi (हिंदी), Indonesian (Bahasa Indonesia), Portuguese (Português), Russian (Русский), Spanish (Español), Swahili (Kiswahili), and Simplified Chinese (简体中文).



--------------------------------

## Straight Street (id: 8633)

STRAIGHT STREET
===============

Straight Street is a street in Damascus where the apostle Paul stayed after his first encounter with the risen Jesus. In the house of Judas on this street, Ananias baptized Paul and Paul's sight was restored ([Acts 9:11](https://ref.ly/Acts9:11)). People called the street “Straight” because, unlike many other streets in the city, this one was actually ran in a straight line. 

The street still exists today and is still straight, though the current street is about 4\.6 meters (15 feet) higher than the original route. People still call the street by this same name (the French name is Rue Droite). It runs east and west on the south boundary of the Christian section of town. The “house of Judas” is no longer there. But in a lane off the eastern end of Straight Street is the “house of Ananias.”

*See also* Damascus.

* **Associated Passages:** ACT 9:11
* **Associated Articles:** Damascus (ID: `4742@TyndaleBibleDictionary`)

