# Aquifer Open Bible Dictionary

**Tyndale Open Bible Dictionary: Aquifer Edition**

This work is an adaptation of *Tyndale Open Bible Dictionary* © 2023 Tyndale House Publishers, licensed under the CC BY\-SA 4\.0 license. The adaptation, *Aquifer Open Bible Dictionary*, was created by BiblioNexus and is also licensed under CC BY\-SA 4\.0\.

This resource has been adapted into multiple languages, including English, Tok Pisin, Arabic (عربي), French (Français), Hindi (हिंदी), Indonesian (Bahasa Indonesia), Portuguese (Português), Russian (Русский), Spanish (Español), Swahili (Kiswahili), and Simplified Chinese (简体中文).



--------------------------------

## Sore (id: 8583)

SORE
====

A sore is an area of skin that looks different from the normal skin around it. It has clear edges where the abnormal skin meets healthy skin. Even if someone has sores from head to toe, there will still be normal skin between each sore.

The word “sore” can describe many kinds of skin problems. These include scall, scab, swelling, emerod (a painful swelling), plague (a serious skin disease), and scar.

The King James Version also uses “sore” in a nonmedical way to mean “very” or “extremely.” For example, “Hezekiah wept sore” means “Hezekiah wept very much” ([2 Kings 20:3](https://ref.ly/2Kgs20:3)) or “sore afraid” ([Ezekiel 27:35](https://ref.ly/Ezek27:35)).

*See also* Disease; Medicine and Medical Practice.

* **Associated Passages:** 2KI 20:3; EZK 27:35
* **Associated Articles:** Disease (ID: `4860@TyndaleBibleDictionary`); Medicine and Medical Practice (ID: `7011@TyndaleBibleDictionary`)

