# Aquifer Open Bible Dictionary

**Tyndale Open Bible Dictionary: Aquifer Edition**

This work is an adaptation of *Tyndale Open Bible Dictionary* © 2023 Tyndale House Publishers, licensed under the CC BY\-SA 4\.0 license. The adaptation, *Aquifer Open Bible Dictionary*, was created by BiblioNexus and is also licensed under CC BY\-SA 4\.0\.

This resource has been adapted into multiple languages, including English, Tok Pisin, Arabic (عربي), French (Français), Hindi (हिंदी), Indonesian (Bahasa Indonesia), Portuguese (Português), Russian (Русский), Spanish (Español), Swahili (Kiswahili), and Simplified Chinese (简体中文).



--------------------------------

## Taanach (id: 8688)

TAANACH
=======

One of the Canaanite fortress cities bordering the plain of Esdraelon and the valley of Jezreel, including Jokneam, Megiddo, Ibleam, and Beth\-shan. The modern site, about five miles (8 kilometers) southeast of Megiddo, retains the ancient name, Tell Taanak. Excavations reveal a 14th\-century BC wall made of huge, irregularly shaped rocks, with smaller stones set in the chinks, along with ruins of a local king’s palace. Some 40 cuneiform tablets of the 15th and 14th centuries BC were unearthed, and from a later period, brick houses possibly of Israelite construction. A terra\-cotta incense altar was found in a house of Israelite date.

Taanach is first mentioned in the Bible in a list of kings conquered by the Israelites on the west side of the Jordan ([Jos 12:21](https://ref.ly/Josh12:21)). In the tribal division of Palestine, Manasseh received Taanach ([21:25](https://ref.ly/Josh21:25)), which was also named as a Levitical city. Manasseh, however, was not able to capture Taanach or any of the other strong cities in its inheritance ([Jgs 1:27](https://ref.ly/Judg1:27)).

After the defeat of Sisera, Deborah and Barak sang a song in which it was said that the fighting took place at Taanach near the waters of Megiddo ([Jgs 5:19](https://ref.ly/Judg5:19)). In the time of Solomon, Taanach was one of the towns mentioned in the enumeration of the administrative districts responsible for supplying monthly provisions for the king’s household ([1 Kgs 4:12](https://ref.ly/1Kgs4:12)). The last mention of Taanach in the Bible is in a genealogical list ([1 Chr 7:29](https://ref.ly/1Chr7:29)), where the city is said to have belonged to Ephraim, along the borders of the Manassites.

* **Associated Passages:** JOS 12:21; JOS 21:25; JDG 1:27; JDG 5:19; 1KI 4:12; 1CH 7:29

