# Aquifer Open Bible Dictionary

**Tyndale Open Bible Dictionary: Aquifer Edition**

This work is an adaptation of *Tyndale Open Bible Dictionary* © 2023 Tyndale House Publishers, licensed under the CC BY\-SA 4\.0 license. The adaptation, *Aquifer Open Bible Dictionary*, was created by BiblioNexus and is also licensed under CC BY\-SA 4\.0\.

This resource has been adapted into multiple languages, including English, Tok Pisin, Arabic (عربي), French (Français), Hindi (हिंदी), Indonesian (Bahasa Indonesia), Portuguese (Português), Russian (Русский), Spanish (Español), Swahili (Kiswahili), and Simplified Chinese (简体中文).



--------------------------------

## Swift (id: 800562)

SWIFT
=====

A swift is a small bird and a strong flyer (genus *Apus*). Like the swallow, it has long, bent wings and a split tail. These help it fly very fast as it skims the ground and sweeps through the air. A swift eats many harmful insects, catching them in its mouth while flying.

Many swifts build nests in rooftops or small spaces in city walls. Their nests are made of strong feathers glued together with saliva. Other swifts live in caves or cracks in rocks.

Common swifts are native to Israel. In the Jordan Valley they often gather in large flocks. The swift has a soft, delicate voice, and its cry could be easily interpreted as melodious wailing.

Swifts migrate with great timing ([Jeremiah 8:7](https://ref.ly/Jer8:7)). They arrive in the Holy Land in late winter. Huge flocks fill the cities with their cries.

*See also* Birds; Swallow.

* **Associated Articles:** Swallow (ID: `8667@TyndaleBibleDictionary`)

