# Aquifer Open Bible Dictionary

**Tyndale Open Bible Dictionary: Aquifer Edition**

This work is an adaptation of *Tyndale Open Bible Dictionary* © 2023 Tyndale House Publishers, licensed under the CC BY\-SA 4\.0 license. The adaptation, *Aquifer Open Bible Dictionary*, was created by BiblioNexus and is also licensed under CC BY\-SA 4\.0\.

This resource has been adapted into multiple languages, including English, Tok Pisin, Arabic (عربي), French (Français), Hindi (हिंदी), Indonesian (Bahasa Indonesia), Portuguese (Português), Russian (Русский), Spanish (Español), Swahili (Kiswahili), and Simplified Chinese (简体中文).



--------------------------------

## Sweet Bay Tree, Bay Laurel (id: 4039)

SWEET BAY TREE, BAY LAUREL
==========================

A tree that naturally grows in Israel and the surrounding areas. It grows 12 to 18 meters (40 to 60 feet) high. It has fragrant, evergreen leaves.

In [Psalm 37:35](https://ref.ly/Ps37:35), the "well\-rooted native tree" might refer to the cedar of Lebanon (*Cedrus libani*). But most scholars believe it refers to the sweet bay (*Laurus nobilis*), also called the bay laurel. This evergreen tree is native to the Mediterranean region and grows in thickets and woodlands, from coastal areas to mid\-elevation mountain regions. While it grows abundantly in certain areas, such as Mount Carmel and near Hebron, it is not common throughout Israel and the surrounding areas.

People have used its leaves as a seasoning in cooking for centuries. Additionally, its fruit, leaves, and bark have been used in traditional medicine for many years.

* **Associated Articles:** Plants (ID: `7761@Unknown`)

