# Aquifer Open Bible Dictionary

**Tyndale Open Bible Dictionary: Aquifer Edition**

This work is an adaptation of *Tyndale Open Bible Dictionary* © 2023 Tyndale House Publishers, licensed under the CC BY\-SA 4\.0 license. The adaptation, *Aquifer Open Bible Dictionary*, was created by BiblioNexus and is also licensed under CC BY\-SA 4\.0\.

This resource has been adapted into multiple languages, including English, Tok Pisin, Arabic (عربي), French (Français), Hindi (हिंदी), Indonesian (Bahasa Indonesia), Portuguese (Português), Russian (Русский), Spanish (Español), Swahili (Kiswahili), and Simplified Chinese (简体中文).



--------------------------------

## Syracuse (id: 8684)

SYRACUSE
========

Town on the east coast of Sicily and the island’s most important city. Here Paul’s ship, on which he traveled to Rome as a prisoner, made a three\-day stop following his shipwreck and three\-month stay in Malta ([Acts 28:12](https://ref.ly/Acts28:12)). Syracuse had a fine harbor and was a natural port of call for a ship sailing from Malta through the straits of Messina between Sicily and Italy en route to Rome.

In the eighth century BC, Syracuse became a Greek colony, funded by Archias of Corinth. During the fifth century, it grew to great power and influence and was second only to Carthage as the most prominent city of the western Mediterranean. It played a significant role in the struggle between Rome and Carthage in the third century and was captured by Rome in 212 BC. Caesar Augustus settled Syracuse in 21 BC, making it a Roman colony (cf. Philippi). It is not stated in [Acts 28](https://ref.ly/Acts28:1-Acts28:31) that Paul found Christians there, but later evidence from its catacombs indicates the existence of a church.

* **Associated Passages:** ACT 28:12; ACT 28:1–ACT 28:31

