# Aquifer Open Bible Dictionary

**Tyndale Open Bible Dictionary: Aquifer Edition**

This work is an adaptation of *Tyndale Open Bible Dictionary* © 2023 Tyndale House Publishers, licensed under the CC BY\-SA 4\.0 license. The adaptation, *Aquifer Open Bible Dictionary*, was created by BiblioNexus and is also licensed under CC BY\-SA 4\.0\.

This resource has been adapted into multiple languages, including English, Tok Pisin, Arabic (عربي), French (Français), Hindi (हिंदी), Indonesian (Bahasa Indonesia), Portuguese (Português), Russian (Русский), Spanish (Español), Swahili (Kiswahili), and Simplified Chinese (简体中文).



--------------------------------

## Syene (id: 8678)

SYENE\*
=======

Southern Egyptian village (modern Aswan) demarcating Egypt’s border with Ethiopia. The Hebrew form possibly derives from a word for “market” or “trading center,” reflecting the importance of the outpost as a place of commerce. The remote location of Syene made it a useful geographical reference for designating the full span of Egypt’s borders. “From Migdol to Syene” ([Ez 29:10](https://ref.ly/Ezek29:10); [30:6](https://ref.ly/Ezek30:6)) describes Egypt from northern delta to southern border (cf. Israel’s description, “from Dan to Beersheba,” [1 Sm 3:20](https://ref.ly/1Sam3:20); [1 Kgs 4:25](https://ref.ly/1Kgs4:25)). Syene was located on the east bank of the Nile just north of the first cataract. While valued by the Egyptians as a source of granite, Syene’s fate was closely tied to Elephantine Island nearby. Elephantine was South Egypt’s administrative center and was well fortified against attack. It was at Elephantine that Jews fleeing Judea in 587 BC found refuge and formed a colony.

* **Associated Passages:** 1SA 3:20; 1KI 4:25; EZK 29:10; EZK 30:6

