# Aquifer Open Bible Dictionary

**Tyndale Open Bible Dictionary: Aquifer Edition**

This work is an adaptation of *Tyndale Open Bible Dictionary* © 2023 Tyndale House Publishers, licensed under the CC BY\-SA 4\.0 license. The adaptation, *Aquifer Open Bible Dictionary*, was created by BiblioNexus and is also licensed under CC BY\-SA 4\.0\.

This resource has been adapted into multiple languages, including English, Tok Pisin, Arabic (عربي), French (Français), Hindi (हिंदी), Indonesian (Bahasa Indonesia), Portuguese (Português), Russian (Русский), Spanish (Español), Swahili (Kiswahili), and Simplified Chinese (简体中文).



--------------------------------

## Syrtis (id: 8687)

SYRTIS
======

Syritis was the name of two bodies of water off the northern coast of Africa that ancient sailors feared. People called the larger one Syrtis Major and the smaller one Syrtis Minor. Paul and his shipmates were in danger of drifting toward Syrtis Major after they left the island of Crete on their voyage to Rome. A powerful northeasterly wind had blown across their path, threatening to push their ship southwestward across the Mediterranean Sea into Syrtis Major ([Acts 27:17](https://ref.ly/Acts27:17)).

Today, people call Syrtis Major the Gulf of Sidra. It cuts into the coast of Libya and stretches 442\.5 kilometers (275 miles) from the town of Misratah to the city of Benghazi. Today, people call Syrtis Minor the Gulf of Gabes. It cuts into the eastern coast of Tunisia. Sailors feared these bodies of water because their sandbars shifted quickly. This created unpredictable shallow areas (called shoals) and dangerous tides and currents.

* **Associated Passages:** ACT 27:17

