# Aquifer Open Bible Dictionary

**Tyndale Open Bible Dictionary: Aquifer Edition**

This work is an adaptation of *Tyndale Open Bible Dictionary* © 2023 Tyndale House Publishers, licensed under the CC BY\-SA 4\.0 license. The adaptation, *Aquifer Open Bible Dictionary*, was created by BiblioNexus and is also licensed under CC BY\-SA 4\.0\.

This resource has been adapted into multiple languages, including English, Tok Pisin, Arabic (عربي), French (Français), Hindi (हिंदी), Indonesian (Bahasa Indonesia), Portuguese (Português), Russian (Русский), Spanish (Español), Swahili (Kiswahili), and Simplified Chinese (简体中文).



--------------------------------

## Tadmor (id: 8708)

TADMOR
======

Ancient city whose name appears in a list of Solomon’s building achievements in [2 Chronicles 8:4](https://ref.ly/2Chr8:4). The parallel verse in [1 Kings 9:18](https://ref.ly/1Kgs9:18) reads “Tamar” in some Hebrew manuscripts and it is uncertain if the same city was intended.

Solomon built or rebuilt a number of cities, including store cities and cities for his horses and chariots. Among the cities mentioned is “Tadmor in the desert.” Tadmor, situated some 140 miles (225\.3 kilometers) northeast of Damascus, is mentioned in the records of the Assyrian king Tiglath\-pileser I (c. 1114–c. 1076 BC).

In Greek and Roman times, the city was known as Palmyra, whose ruins may be seen today. The oasis city was an important stopping place on the caravan route, and therefore could have been valuable to Solomon in his extensive trading ventures. It gained its greatest prominence during the reign of Queen Zenobia. The Roman Aurelian destroyed it in AD 273\. Though rebuilt, it never regained its former position.

* **Associated Passages:** 1KI 9:18; 2CH 8:4

