# Aquifer Open Bible Dictionary

**Tyndale Open Bible Dictionary: Aquifer Edition**

This work is an adaptation of *Tyndale Open Bible Dictionary* © 2023 Tyndale House Publishers, licensed under the CC BY\-SA 4\.0 license. The adaptation, *Aquifer Open Bible Dictionary*, was created by BiblioNexus and is also licensed under CC BY\-SA 4\.0\.

This resource has been adapted into multiple languages, including English, Tok Pisin, Arabic (عربي), French (Français), Hindi (हिंदी), Indonesian (Bahasa Indonesia), Portuguese (Português), Russian (Русский), Spanish (Español), Swahili (Kiswahili), and Simplified Chinese (简体中文).



--------------------------------

## Theophany (id: 8814)

THEOPHANY
=========

An appearance or manifestation of God. The word comes from the Greek noun for “God” *(theos)* and the Greek verb “to appear” *(phano).* 

A theophany is a representation of God in temporary but identifiable forms. It is one way God’s special revelation is given to people. It is a divine revelation in which God is made visible and recognizable to people.

God made himself known to people through:

* A special messenger called the angel of the Lord
* Through the pillar and cloud that accompanied the Israelites in their wilderness wanderings
* Through the shekinah, or his presence inside of the tabernacle.

*See* Angel (Angel of the Lord); Pillar of Fire and Cloud; Shekinah.

* **Associated Articles:** Angel (ID: `3611@TyndaleBibleDictionary`); Pillar of Fire and Cloud (ID: `7737@TyndaleBibleDictionary`); Shekinah (ID: `8332@TyndaleBibleDictionary`)

