# Aquifer Open Bible Dictionary

**Tyndale Open Bible Dictionary: Aquifer Edition**

This work is an adaptation of *Tyndale Open Bible Dictionary* © 2023 Tyndale House Publishers, licensed under the CC BY\-SA 4\.0 license. The adaptation, *Aquifer Open Bible Dictionary*, was created by BiblioNexus and is also licensed under CC BY\-SA 4\.0\.

This resource has been adapted into multiple languages, including English, Tok Pisin, Arabic (عربي), French (Français), Hindi (हिंदी), Indonesian (Bahasa Indonesia), Portuguese (Português), Russian (Русский), Spanish (Español), Swahili (Kiswahili), and Simplified Chinese (简体中文).



--------------------------------

## Test (id: 8797)

TEST
====

The process of proving one’s worth. When ascribed to God in his dealings with people, it means that God tests his peoples’ faith and moral character. When the word is used in a negative way, it means “to tempt”—that is, to entice, solicit, or provoke to sin. Both senses of the word could be applied to Jesus’ forty days of trial in the wilderness. He was tested by God and found faithful, while he was tempted by Satan and found sinless. The Spirit of God led Jesus into the wilderness to have his faith tried; but the agent in this trial was the wicked one, whose whole object was to seduce Jesus from his allegiance to God. It was temptation in the bad sense of the term. Yet Jesus did not give in to temptation; he passed the test (see [2 Cor 5:21](https://ref.ly/2Cor5:21); [Heb 7:26](https://ref.ly/Heb7:26)).

* **Associated Passages:** 2CO 5:21; HEB 7:26

