# Aquifer Open Bible Dictionary

**Tyndale Open Bible Dictionary: Aquifer Edition**

This work is an adaptation of *Tyndale Open Bible Dictionary* © 2023 Tyndale House Publishers, licensed under the CC BY\-SA 4\.0 license. The adaptation, *Aquifer Open Bible Dictionary*, was created by BiblioNexus and is also licensed under CC BY\-SA 4\.0\.

This resource has been adapted into multiple languages, including English, Tok Pisin, Arabic (عربي), French (Français), Hindi (हिंदी), Indonesian (Bahasa Indonesia), Portuguese (Português), Russian (Русский), Spanish (Español), Swahili (Kiswahili), and Simplified Chinese (简体中文).



--------------------------------

## Timothy, First Letter to (id: 8854)

TIMOTHY, First Letter to
========================

The first letter from Paul to his young coworker Timothy.

We should consider the authorship, date, and background of 1 Timothy along with 2 Timothy and Titus. These letters, known as the Pastoral Epistles, were written to help two young coworkers address church issues in Ephesus and Crete.

Preview

• Author

• Date

• Background

• Theology

• Content

Author
------

In 1 Timothy, as in 2 Timothy and Titus, Paul is named as the author in the first verse. Paul’s name is the only one linked to these letters in early church tradition since the time of Irenaeus, around AD 185\. All three letters contain many personal references to Paul's life, providing strong evidence that he was indeed the author.

Some scholars argue against Paul writing it for these reasons:

1. The Greek vocabulary includes many words not found in other letters by Paul.

    But, the subject matter in these letters is different. In the Pastoral Epistles, the author addresses technical issues of church organization and discipline. A church leader writes to other leaders. Paul was highly educated and had a large vocabulary. All the unique words in the Pastoral Letters could have been part of Paul's vocabulary. If they were not his words, they might have come from the scribes Paul often used to write his letters.

2. Some notes about Paul's journeys do not match the journeys described in the book of Acts.

    To believe that Paul wrote the Pastoral Epistles and did the things described in them, he must have been released from Roman imprisonment. After his release, he would have traveled to Crete, Ephesus, and Macedonia. The writer of Acts may not have mentioned these later journeys because the book concludes with Paul’s imprisonment in Rome. Some legal evidence suggests that Paul would have been released automatically after two years if he had not been convicted by then.

3. The detailed development of the church in the pastoral letters suggests they were written after Paul's lifetime. They mention elders, bishops, and deacons.

    Elders existed in Old Testament times, and bishops in local churches are likely the same as elders. Paul also mentions deacons in his letters, like in [Philippians 1:1](https://ref.ly/Phil1:1).

Most conservative scholars, and many others, strongly believe that Paul wrote all three Pastoral Letters.

Date
----

If Paul wrote the Pastorals, he likely wrote 1 Timothy after his first release from Roman imprisonment, around AD 61 or 62\. He wrote it before his second imprisonment, between AD 64 and 67, when Nero died. Paul left Timothy in Ephesus and traveled to Macedonia ([1 Timothy 1:3](https://ref.ly/1Tim1:3)), where he may have written 1 Timothy. The letter was addressed to Timothy in Ephesus.

Background
----------

Paul left Timothy in charge of the church in Ephesus ([1 Timothy 1:2–3](https://ref.ly/1Tim1:2-1Tim1:3)). Paul wanted to visit the Roman province of Asia, where Ephesus was the main city, during his second missionary journey, but the spirit did not allow it. Instead, he traveled to Macedonia and Greece ([Acts 16:6](https://ref.ly/Acts16:6)). He briefly visited Ephesus at the end of his second journey ([Acts 18:19–20](https://ref.ly/Acts18:19-Acts18:20)). On his third journey, he made Ephesus his main base and spent three years there ([Acts 19:1–20:1](https://ref.ly/Acts19:1-Acts20:1)). During his first imprisonment in Rome, he wrote a letter to Ephesus and nearby churches. A few years later, he wrote 1 Timothy to Timothy in Ephesus.

Theology
--------

The theology of 1 Timothy aligns with other letters by Paul and the New Testament overall. It repeatedly shows God's sovereignty and love. Jesus is presented as both God and man. Salvation comes through faith in God via Christ. The law cannot save anyone because everyone has broken it. However, the law is good and guides saved people to live a life that pleases God.

The church is a major focus of the letter. All Christians should join the church. They gain much from it for developing Christian character and can serve God more effectively within it. The church needs organization to work effectively. It must always strive to avoid false teachings and teach the truths of the gospel.

Content
-------

### Salutation ([1:1–2](https://ref.ly/1Tim1:1-1Tim1:2))

The author, Paul, calls himself an apostle, chosen and authorized by God the Father and his son, Christ Jesus. Paul had the authority to speak to the young pastor and the church.

The letter is written to Timothy, Paul's cherished spiritual child. Paul gave him three blessings: 

1. Grace
2. Mercy
3. Peace from God

### Dealing with Heresy ([1:3–20](https://ref.ly/1Tim1:3-1Tim1:20))

Paul left Timothy in Ephesus to stop people from teaching incorrect beliefs ([1 Timothy 1:3](https://ref.ly/1Tim1:3)). Paul thought that beliefs were as important as actions. The false teaching mentioned here is an early form of Gnosticism, a harmful belief that troubled the church for centuries.

Early Gnostics believed they have deeper insights into truth than average Christians. They separated God as spirit from humans as matter. For Gnostics, many angels, emanations \[a spiritual overflowing from God], and time periods connected the two, instead of Jesus Christ as the sole mediator. They debated myths and fables. They sought salvation by pleasing an endless chain of angels rather than accepting God's salvation through faith. However, only God's grace can save sinners, as Paul knew well.

### Correct Worship in the Church ([2:1–15](https://ref.ly/1Tim2:1-1Tim2:15))

“I urge that petitions, prayers, intercessions, and thanksgiving be offered for everyone” ([1 Timothy 2:1](https://ref.ly/1Tim2:1)). Prayer is a very important part of Christian church worship. Paul stressed the need for special prayers for those in high authority, even though the state was the Roman Empire with Nero as its emperor. Paul taught this clearly in [Romans 13](https://ref.ly/Rom13:1-Rom13:14), and Jesus told his disciples to give to Caesar what belonged to him ([Matthew 22:17](https://ref.ly/Matt22:17)).

Christian men and women should pray to God, raising holy hands that are free from sin, anger, and resentment. Paul specifically advised the women: “I want the women to adorn themselves with respectable apparel, with modesty, and with self\-control, not with braided hair or gold or pearls or expensive clothes, but with good deeds, as is proper for women who profess to worship God” ([1 Timothy 2:9–10](https://ref.ly/1Tim2:9-1Tim2:10)). Paul also said, “I do not permit a woman to teach or to exercise authority over a man” ([1 Timothy 2:12](https://ref.ly/1Tim2:12)). However, this did not mean they could not speak in church meetings. According to Acts and 1 Corinthians, women prayed, prophesied, and testified in church meetings. Teaching was reserved for men because elders, who were male, had the responsibility to teach. Thus, teaching and having authority were connected.

### Proper Organization in the Church ([3:1–5:25](https://ref.ly/1Tim3:1-1Tim5:25))

The first issue to resolve about the early church's organization was identifying the bishops. The first verse of this section states, “If anyone aspires to be an overseer, he desires a noble task” ([1 Timothy 3:1](https://ref.ly/1Tim3:1)). In all the Pastoral Epistles, the bishop is clearly an officer within a local church, not an official over multiple churches like the episcopal bishop role that developed in the early second century. In light of [Titus 1:4–6](https://ref.ly/Titus1:4-Titus1:6), where Paul moved directly from elders to bishops, most scholars believe Paul used the two terms interchangeably. Timothy would be the closest to a modern pastor in the church, with elders (bishops) and deacons helping him govern the church.

Being an elder in the church is a noble goal. However, a person must meet high standards to be chosen for this important role. He should earn respect from both church members and outsiders. While most qualifications are clear, a few need further explanation.

“An overseer, then, must be above reproach, the husband of but one wife” ([1 Timothy 3:2](https://ref.ly/1Tim3:2)). The Greek literally says, “a man of one woman.” This clearly prohibits polygamy and excludes a man who is unfaithful to his wife. It likely does not exclude a man who has been divorced and remarried or a bachelor who has never married. The church should require its leaders to uphold a high standard of sexual morality.

An elder should manage his family well if he is to lead in the church. He should not be a heavy drinker. Paul did not require complete abstinence, but he insisted that an elder should not be controlled by alcohol. An elder should not be a new Christian, as this might make him arrogant and hinder his leadership. Overall, only a person of excellent character should be chosen as an elder or bishop in the church.

Paul then spoke about the role of the deacon: “Deacons likewise must be dignified” ([1 Timothy 3:8](https://ref.ly/1Tim3:8)). The qualifications for deacons are almost the same as those for elders. Before becoming deacons, they should have experience in church work. [First Timothy 3:11](https://ref.ly/1Tim3:11) applies the same qualifications to women who want to be deacons and to the wives of deacons. [1 Timothy 3:12](https://ref.ly/1Tim3:12) continues with the general qualifications for deacons.

In [1 Timothy 4](https://ref.ly/1Tim4:1-1Tim4:16), Paul encourages Timothy to lead the church, especially when dealing with heretics. Some Gnostic heretics promoted false asceticism, forbidding marriage and certain foods. However, God provided these things for us to use and appreciate for his glory. Timothy's role as a pastor was to teach God's truths and avoid getting involved in debates about the heretics' godless and silly myths ([1 Timothy 4:7](https://ref.ly/1Tim4:7)). Paul advised Timothy to keep his spirit strong through regular spiritual practice, which was more important than physical exercise.

Paul knew Timothy was young, and older Christians might look down on him for it. Timothy should work hard to earn their respect—in speech, behavior, love, faith, and purity ([1 Timothy 4:12](https://ref.ly/1Tim4:12)). Since God called Timothy and the church ordained him by laying hands on him, Timothy should aim to meet these important responsibilities.

Paul advised Timothy on how a young preacher should interact with different age and gender groups in the church. He should treat older men like his father, older women like his mother, younger men like his brothers, and younger women like his sisters, emphasizing "with absolute purity" ([1 Timothy 5:2](https://ref.ly/1Tim5:2)).

Paul advised Timothy on how to help widows. At that time, few women could work, and there was no insurance or social security. Women who lost their husbands faced difficult situations. The early church created a list to help widows. Younger widows were encouraged to remarry for support. Families able to help should care for their own needy members. The church would then care for older widows without family support. The church must use its limited resources wisely and fairly to help as many as possible.

In the early church, leaders received payment for their work. Paul said they should "worthy of double honor" ([1 Timothy 5:17](https://ref.ly/1Tim5:17)). Church leaders should not be chosen or ordained too quickly, and their sins should not be ignored. Timothy was also warned to keep himself free from sin. The section ends with another discussion about the sins of church leaders ([1 Timothy 5:24–25](https://ref.ly/1Tim5:24-1Tim5:25)). When sins are obvious, the church must discipline the sinner. Sometimes, a person's sins are not visible to others, but God knows and will address them. The same applies to the many good deeds of leaders.

### Some Practical Teaching about the Christian Life ([6:1–21](https://ref.ly/1Tim6:1-1Tim6:21))

In those days, slavery was common. Christian slaves were expected to be obedient, and Christian masters were expected to be fair. Many centuries later, Christian values helped end slavery. However, during Paul's time, it was not possible for him or anyone else to start a movement to abolish slavery.

Timothy was encouraged to ignore the false teachings and focus on sharing the true messages of the gospel.

Two sections ([1 Timothy 6:6–10, 17–19](https://ref.ly/1Tim6:6-1Tim6:10,1Tim6:17-1Tim6:19)) discuss a Christian's view of wealth. Paul closely followed Jesus's teachings. Money can become a false god and cause many problems for church members. However, it can also serve God and become treasure stored in heaven.

Finally, in two sections ([1 Timothy 6:11–16, 20–21](https://ref.ly/1Tim6:11-1Tim6:16,1Tim6:20-1Tim6:21)), Paul encouraged Timothy to do his best to be a true man of God. He should fight well as a soldier of God. Life will often be hard, but Timothy should focus on the second coming of the glorious Christ.

*See also* Timothy, Second Letter to; Titus, Letter to.

* **Associated Passages:** MAT 22:17; ACT 16:6; PHP 1:1; 1TI 1:3; 1TI 2:1; 1TI 2:12; 1TI 3:1; 1TI 3:2; 1TI 3:8; 1TI 3:11; 1TI 3:12; 1TI 4:7; 1TI 4:12; 1TI 5:2; 1TI 5:17; ACT 19:1–ACT 20:1; 1TI 2:9–1TI 2:10; ACT 18:19–ACT 18:20; ROM 13:1–ROM 13:14; 1TI 1:2–1TI 1:3; TIT 1:4–TIT 1:6; 1TI 4:1–1TI 4:16; 1TI 5:24–1TI 5:25; 1TI 6:6–1TI 6:10; 1TI 6:17–1TI 6:19; 1TI 6:11–1TI 6:16; 1TI 6:20–1TI 6:21
* **Associated Articles:** Timothy, Second Letter to (ID: `8856@TyndaleBibleDictionary`); Titus, Letter to (ID: `8872@TyndaleBibleDictionary`)

