# Aquifer Open Bible Dictionary

**Tyndale Open Bible Dictionary: Aquifer Edition**

This work is an adaptation of *Tyndale Open Bible Dictionary* © 2023 Tyndale House Publishers, licensed under the CC BY\-SA 4\.0 license. The adaptation, *Aquifer Open Bible Dictionary*, was created by BiblioNexus and is also licensed under CC BY\-SA 4\.0\.

This resource has been adapted into multiple languages, including English, Tok Pisin, Arabic (عربي), French (Français), Hindi (हिंदी), Indonesian (Bahasa Indonesia), Portuguese (Português), Russian (Русский), Spanish (Español), Swahili (Kiswahili), and Simplified Chinese (简体中文).



--------------------------------

## Troas (id: 8930)

TROAS
=====

A city in ancient times that was located in what is now Turkey. It was located 16\.1 kilometers (10 miles) south of Troy. Troy was famous as the place where the Trojan War happened, which the ancient poet Homer wrote about. Both Troy and Troas were built on an area called the Troad Plain, which stretched about 16\.1 kilometers (10 miles) along the sea. The apostle Paul traveled from Troas to Macedonia after receiving a vision where a man said, “Come over to Macedonia and help us” ([Acts 16:9](https://ref.ly/Acts16:9)).

Early History
-------------

About 300 BC, the Seleucid king Antigonus founded the city and named it after himself. Later, the name of the city changed to Alexandria Troas in honor of Alexander the Great. He had passed through Troas in pursuit of the Persians. The city became a Roman colony when Roman power replaced the Greeks. According to some scholars, Julius Caesar envisioned Troas as his eastern capital. Later, Constantine the Great first considered making it his capital before Byzantium (Constantinople). 

Paul's Visits to Troas
----------------------

Troas was an important seaport during the time of Paul. This was because it was the easiest and shortest route from Asia to Europe.

On the second missionary journey, Paul and Silas came to Troas. This was "after the Holy Spirit had prevented them from speaking the word in the province of Asia" ([Acts 16:6](https://ref.ly/Acts16:6)). This trip to Europe is not emphasized in Acts. Yet, many scholars think this short voyage had great historical importance. They compare its significance to the invasion of Britain by Julius Caesar. After this vision, Paul and Silas left Toras and passed the island of Samothrace. Then they landed at Neapolis (modern Kavalla), their first stop in Europe (verse [11](https://ref.ly/Acts16:11)).

We know someone must have established a church in Troas. This is because of events described later. Paul finished his mission in Ephesus. Then he stayed and preached the gospel in Troas ([2 Corinthians 2:12](https://ref.ly/2Cor2:12)). On his way to Jerusalem for the last time, Paul stopped in Troas. There, he preached until after midnight. One of the young men slumped down into a sound sleep. Then he fell from a window and died. But Paul resurrected him. Then Paul continued teaching until morning ([Acts 20:6–12](https://ref.ly/Acts20:6-Acts20:12)). 

Paul visited Troas again. It seems as though this was when they arrested him there. He left behind a cloak and papers. In his second letter to Timothy, Paul asks him to bring these items to him at his prison in Rome ([2 Timothy 4:13](https://ref.ly/2Tim4:13)).

* **Associated Passages:** ACT 16:6; ACT 16:9; ACT 16:11; 2CO 2:12; 2TI 4:13; ACT 20:6–ACT 20:12

