# Aquifer Open Bible Dictionary

**Tyndale Open Bible Dictionary: Aquifer Edition**

This work is an adaptation of *Tyndale Open Bible Dictionary* © 2023 Tyndale House Publishers, licensed under the CC BY\-SA 4\.0 license. The adaptation, *Aquifer Open Bible Dictionary*, was created by BiblioNexus and is also licensed under CC BY\-SA 4\.0\.

This resource has been adapted into multiple languages, including English, Tok Pisin, Arabic (عربي), French (Français), Hindi (हिंदी), Indonesian (Bahasa Indonesia), Portuguese (Português), Russian (Русский), Spanish (Español), Swahili (Kiswahili), and Simplified Chinese (简体中文).



--------------------------------

## Trachonitis, Traconitis (id: 8907)

TRACHONITIS, TRACONITIS
=======================

One of the five Roman provinces east of the Jordan River. The other Roman provinces east of the Jordan River were Batanea, Gaulanitis, Auranitis, and Iturea. This region, which may have included parts of Gaulanitis, Batanea, and Auranitis, was part of the tetrarchy ruled by Philip, the brother of Herod ([Luke 3:1](https://ref.ly/Luke3:1)). Traconitis was a barren area located northeast of the Sea of Galilee. In Aramaic, it was known as *Argob*, meaning “heap of stones,” which described the rough and rocky terrain.

Aside from the reference in Luke, Traconitis is rarely mentioned in historical records. The Jewish historian Josephus suggests that Uz, the son of Aram (compare [Genesis 10:23](https://ref.ly/Gen10:23)), colonized the area. The Romans took control of Traconitis when Augustus defeated a local robber\-chief, Zenodorus. He then gave the land to Herod the Great, on the condition that he suppress the bandits. After Herod's death, his son Philip inherited the land but likely only had control over it in name.

Today, the region is called *el\-Lejah* and is located in southern Syria and northern Jordan.

* **Associated Passages:** GEN 10:23; LUK 3:1

