# Aquifer Open Bible Dictionary

**Tyndale Open Bible Dictionary: Aquifer Edition**

This work is an adaptation of *Tyndale Open Bible Dictionary* © 2023 Tyndale House Publishers, licensed under the CC BY\-SA 4\.0 license. The adaptation, *Aquifer Open Bible Dictionary*, was created by BiblioNexus and is also licensed under CC BY\-SA 4\.0\.

This resource has been adapted into multiple languages, including English, Tok Pisin, Arabic (عربي), French (Français), Hindi (हिंदी), Indonesian (Bahasa Indonesia), Portuguese (Português), Russian (Русский), Spanish (Español), Swahili (Kiswahili), and Simplified Chinese (简体中文).



--------------------------------

## Uzzah (id: 8987)

UZZAH
=====

1. A son of Abinadab who died while helping transport the ark of the covenant when it was returned from the Philistines ([2 Samuel 6:1–8](https://ref.ly/2Sam6:1-2Sam6:8); [1 Chronicles 13:7–11](https://ref.ly/1Chr13:7-1Chr13:11)). Uzzah was struck dead by the Lord because he reached out and took hold of the ark when he tried to steady it. This action went against the instructions of [Numbers 4:15](https://ref.ly/Num4:15). Uzzah's brother, Ahio, was apparently leading the oxen that pulled the cart, while Uzzah walked beside it. Because of this event, David renamed the place Perez\-uzzah (which means “the breaking forth against Uzzah”). David left the ark at the home of Obed\-edom.
2. A Levite from the clan of Merari. [1 Chronicles 6:29](https://ref.ly/1Chr6:29) lists him as the son of Shimei and the father of Shimea.

* **Associated Passages:** NUM 4:15; 1CH 6:29; 2SA 6:1–2SA 6:8; 1CH 13:7–1CH 13:11

