# Aquifer Open Bible Dictionary

**Tyndale Open Bible Dictionary: Aquifer Edition**

This work is an adaptation of *Tyndale Open Bible Dictionary* © 2023 Tyndale House Publishers, licensed under the CC BY\-SA 4\.0 license. The adaptation, *Aquifer Open Bible Dictionary*, was created by BiblioNexus and is also licensed under CC BY\-SA 4\.0\.

This resource has been adapted into multiple languages, including English, Tok Pisin, Arabic (عربي), French (Français), Hindi (हिंदी), Indonesian (Bahasa Indonesia), Portuguese (Português), Russian (Русский), Spanish (Español), Swahili (Kiswahili), and Simplified Chinese (简体中文).



--------------------------------

## Water Lily (id: 9038)

WATER LILY
==========

A water lily is a type of water plant with flat, floating leaves and beautiful, showy flowers. The carved lily decorations mentioned in [1 Kings 7:19–26](https://ref.ly/1Kgs7:19-1Kgs7:26) and [2 Chronicles 4:5](https://ref.ly/2Chr4:5) were probably designed to look like water lily flowers. Few flowers can match the Egyptian lotus or water lily (*Nymphaea lotus*) in beauty. It resembles a large white rose and once grew abundantly on the surface of the Nile River.

The common European white water lily (*Nymphaea alba*) would also have been familiar to the people of Israel. It grows in Europe, the Holy Land, and North Africa. However, it is not as common in Egypt as the white lotus.

Another water lily that the Israelites probably knew is the blue lotus (*Nymphaea caerulea*). Its leaves are 30\.5 to 40\.6 centimeters (12 to 16 inches) across. It has light\-blue flowers that measure 7\.6 to 15\.2 centimeters (3 to 6 inches) across.

*See also* Lily.

* **Associated Articles:** Lily (ID: `6754@TyndaleBibleDictionary`); Plants (ID: `7761@Unknown`)

