# Aquifer Open Bible Dictionary

**Tyndale Open Bible Dictionary: Aquifer Edition**

This work is an adaptation of *Tyndale Open Bible Dictionary* © 2023 Tyndale House Publishers, licensed under the CC BY\-SA 4\.0 license. The adaptation, *Aquifer Open Bible Dictionary*, was created by BiblioNexus and is also licensed under CC BY\-SA 4\.0\.

This resource has been adapted into multiple languages, including English, Tok Pisin, Arabic (عربي), French (Français), Hindi (हिंदी), Indonesian (Bahasa Indonesia), Portuguese (Português), Russian (Русский), Spanish (Español), Swahili (Kiswahili), and Simplified Chinese (简体中文).



--------------------------------

## Wisdom of Jesus Ben Sirach (id: 9075)

WISDOM OF JESUS BEN SIRACH
==========================

A deuterocanonical book (not included in the official Protestant list of books that are considered Scripture). It is also known as Sirach or Ecclesiasticus (not to be confused with Ecclesiastes). The author is known as Jesus ben Sirach. However, recently discovered Hebrew manuscripts name him Simon son of Jesus son of Eleazar ben Sirach. He was a Hebrew sage who lived in the second century BC and taught in Jerusalem ([Sirach 50:27](https://ref.ly/Sir50:27); [51:23](https://ref.ly/Sir51:23) and the following verses). The work seems to be written by an early Sadducean teacher. The Sadducees were a Jewish sect popular during the time of Jesus.

This work was valued highly by both Jewish and Christian readers. The author was a scribe who used Proverbs as a model to pass on his teachings. His teachings are influenced by Jewish orthodoxy (traditional and established beliefs and practices). The book was probably written about 180 BC. 

* **Associated Passages:** SIR 50:27; SIR 51:23

