# Aquifer Open Bible Dictionary

**Tyndale Open Bible Dictionary: Aquifer Edition**

This work is an adaptation of *Tyndale Open Bible Dictionary* © 2023 Tyndale House Publishers, licensed under the CC BY\-SA 4\.0 license. The adaptation, *Aquifer Open Bible Dictionary*, was created by BiblioNexus and is also licensed under CC BY\-SA 4\.0\.

This resource has been adapted into multiple languages, including English, Tok Pisin, Arabic (عربي), French (Français), Hindi (हिंदी), Indonesian (Bahasa Indonesia), Portuguese (Português), Russian (Русский), Spanish (Español), Swahili (Kiswahili), and Simplified Chinese (简体中文).



--------------------------------

## Yom Kippur (id: 9107)

YOM KIPPUR
==========

Yom Kippur is the Hebrew name for the Day of Atonement. It was one of the most important holy days in ancient Israel. It was also called the Day of Atonement. On this day, the high priest performed special ceremonies to ask God to forgive the sins of the people. It was a day for the Israelites to stop working, fast, and show sorrow for their sins ([Leviticus 23:26–32](https://ref.ly/Lev23:26-Lev23:32)). 

The name *Yom Kippur* means “Day of Atonement” in Hebrew. It comes from words that mean “day” (*yom*) and “to make atonement” (*kippur*). It was the only day each year when the high priest could enter the most holy place in the tabernacle.

*See* Feasts and Festivals of Israel.

* **Associated Passages:** LEV 23:26–LEV 23:32
* **Associated Articles:** Feasts and Festivals of Israel (ID: `5248@TyndaleBibleDictionary`)

